arXiv:1506.04789v1 [math.GT] 15 Jun 2015

USING SIMPLICIAL VOLUME TO COUNT MAXIMALLY
BROKEN MORSE TRAJECTORIES
HANNAH ALPERT
Abstract. Given a closed Riemannian manifold of dimension n and a MorseSmale function, there are finitely many n-part broken trajectories of the negative gradient flow. We show that if the manifold admits a hyperbolic metric,
then the number of n-part broken trajectories is always at least the hyperbolic
volume. The proof combines known theorems in Morse theory with lemmas of
Gromov about simplicial volumes of stratified spaces.

1. Introduction
Let M be a closed manifold of dimension n, and let f : M → R be a Morse
function. For any Riemannian metric g on M , we consider the flow along the
negative gradient vector field −∇f ; for every critical point p of f with Morse index
ind(p), the flow determines the descending (or unstable) manifold D(p) of dimension
ind(p) and the ascending (or stable) manifold A(p) of dimension n − ind(p). The
function f satisfies Morse-Smale transversality with respect to the metric g if
for every two critical points p and q, the manifolds D(p) and A(q) have transverse
intersection. In particular, if the indices of p and q differ by 1, then there is a
discrete set of unparametrized flow lines between p and q. An n-part broken
trajectory is a maximum-length path through the resulting directed graph; that
is, it is a sequence of critical points pn , pn−1 , . . . , p1 , p0 where the index of point
pi is i, and a sequence of unparametrized flow lines γn , γn−1 , . . . , γ1 where each γi
runs from pi to pi−1 .
The main theorem of this paper is stated as follows.
Theorem 1. Let M be a closed, oriented manifold of dimension n ≥ 2, admitting
a hyperbolic metric. Let g be an arbitrary Riemannian metric on M , and let f :
(M, g) → R be a Morse function satisfying Morse-Smale transversality. Then we
have
Vol(M, hyp)
,
#(n-part broken trajectories of −∇f ) ≥
Vol ∆n
where Vol ∆n denotes the supremal volume of a straight simplex in n-dimensional
hyperbolic space.
In particular, if M is a closed, oriented manifold such that there exists a MorseSmale gradient vector field with no n-part broken trajectories (for instance, if there
is not a critical point of every index), then M cannot admit a hyperbolic metric.
The hyperbolic volume plays the role of a topological invariant of M ; the larger
the hyperbolic volume, the more topologically complex M is. In even dimension,
2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 53C23 (58E05, 57N80).
1

2

HANNAH ALPERT

the Chern-Gauss-Bonnet theorem implies that the hyperbolic volume is proportional to the Euler characteristic and thus to the sum of the Betti numbers. In
odd dimension, the Euler characteristic is zero, but the Mostow rigidity theorem
(which applies to every dimension at least 3, odd or even) states that M has at
most one hyperbolic metric and so the hyperbolic volume is well-defined. However,
the hyperbolic volume in odd dimension is not proportional to the sum of the Betti
numbers; this fact is implied by the following proposition, which we state for contrast with the main theorem. A similar example appears on page 30 of Gromov’s
paper [Gro09]. The proof is not related to the rest of this paper, but we include it
for completeness.
Proposition 2. There is a sequence M1 , M2 , . . . of closed, oriented hyperbolic manifolds of dimension 3, and a sequence of Morse functions fi : Mi → R, such that
the number of critical points of the Morse functions is uniformly bounded, but the
hyperbolic volumes satisfy
lim Vol(Mi , hyp) = ∞.

i→∞

Proof. Let Σ be an oriented surface of genus at least 2, and let ϕ : Σ → Σ be
a pseudo-Anosov diffeomorphism, so that the mapping torus M1 is a hyperbolic
manifold [Thu98]. Let Mi be the mapping torus of the ith iterate ϕi of ϕ. Then
Mi is an i-fold cover of M1 , and therefore has hyperbolic volume given by
Vol(Mi , hyp) = i · Vol(M1 , hyp).
To create a Morse function on Mi with few critical points, we view Mi as two
copies of Σ × [0, 1] glued along the boundary. We find a Morse function f on
Σ × [0, 1] that has the boundary as a level set and is a standard projection near the
boundary; that is, for some ε > 0, for all (x, t) ∈ Σ × [0, ε) we have f (x, t) = t and
for all (x, t) ∈ Σ × (1 − ε, 1] we have f (x, t) = 1 − t. To construct fi we take f on
one copy of Σ × [0, 1], and −f on the other copy, and glue them together.

Because the Morse inequalities state that the number of Morse critical points is
always at least the sum of the Betti numbers, in this example the Betti numbers
are bounded while the hyperbolic volume is unbounded. The main theorem says
that even though the number of critical points is fixed, there must be an increasing
number of flow lines between them in order to have an unbounded number of 3-part
broken trajectories.
The main theorem fits into a family of theorems initiated by Gromov in the
paper [Gro09]. There, he shows that the hyperbolic volume (really the Gromov
simplicial norm; the definition appears in Section 2 of this paper) is a lower bound
for a different count describing the complexity of a map: he considers a smooth map
of manifolds X n → Y n−1 that drops in dimension by 1, and counts the number of
points at which the set of singular values—an immersed space in Y of codimension
1—intersects itself with the maximum possible multiplicity. The paper [AK15] uses
the same methods to show that the simplicial norm is a lower bound for again
another count: we consider a nonvanishing gradient vector field on a manifold with
boundary, and count the flow lines that have a maximum number of tangencies to
the boundary. In this paper we bring those methods to the setting of Morse-Smale
gradient vector fields.
In the proof of the main theorem, we view the manifold M as a CW-complex in
which the cells are the descending manifolds of the critical points. In Section 2 we

SIMPLICIAL VOLUME AND MORSE BROKEN TRAJECTORIES

3

use tools from Gromov’s paper [Gro09] to bound the hyperbolic volume of M in
terms of the CW structure. Then in Section 3, we invoke machinery from Morse
theory in order to justify the needed properties of the CW structure, including its
relationship to the n-part broken trajectories. We conclude in Section 4 by finishing
the proof of the main theorem.
Acknowledgments. The main theorem was conjectured by Gabriel Katz related
to our collaboration on the paper [AK15]. I would like to thank him and my
advisor Larry Guth for conversations about that project. I would also like to thank
Josh Greene, Jon Bloom, and Nati Blaier for pointing me toward the appropriate
references.
2. Simplicial volume of stratified spaces
The mathematics in this section is all based on Gromov’s simplicial norm, which
was introduced in [Gro82] and is a function on singular homology classes with real
coefficients. The simplicial norm is defined as follows. For every singular chain
c on a topological space X, the norm of c, denoted kck∆, is the sum of absolute
values of the (real) coefficients. For every real homology class h, the simplicial
norm of h, denoted khk∆ , is the infimum of kck∆ over all cycles c representing h.
The simplicial norm is often called the simplicial volume because it generalizes
hyperbolic volume: if M is any closed, oriented hyperbolic manifold of dimension
n, with fundamental class [M ], then the simplicial norm is related to the hyperbolic
volume by the formula
Vol(M, hyp)
,
k[M ]k∆ =
Vol ∆n
where Vol ∆n denotes the supremal volume of a straight simplex in n-dimensional
hyperbolic space (Proportionality Theorem, p. 11 of [Gro82]).
Because of this proportionality, our main theorem has an equivalent formulation
in terms of the simplicial volume instead of the normalized hyperbolic volume. The
revised statement, which appears as Theorem 18, applies not only to manifolds
admitting a hyperbolic metric but to any closed manifolds with nonzero simplicial
volume. Among these are manifolds with sectional curvature pinched between
two negative constants; products of hyperbolic manifolds, which never admit a
hyperbolic metric; and, generalizing the products, locally symmetric spaces of noncompact type, as proved by Lafont and Schmidt in [LS06].
In the paper [Gro09], Gromov introduces the Amenable Reduction Lemma and
the Localization Lemma in order to bound simplicial norms in stratified spaces;
see [AK15] for a more detailed exposition of those lemmas. The purpose of this section is to prove a version of the Localization Lemma that applies to CW-complexes,
which have an obvious partition by the open cells of the CW structure; this partition does not satisfy the definition of stratification but behaves like a stratification
for this purpose.
In order to state this variant of the Localization Lemma, we need to define generalized stratifications and a stratified version of the simplicial norm. In Gromov’s
paper [Gro09], a stratification of a space is defined to be any partition with the
following property: if a stratum S intersects the closure S ′ of another stratum S ′ ,
then S ⊆ S ′ and we write S  S ′ . In this paper, we want the theorems about
stratifications to apply to CW-complexes, partitioned by the open cells; however,
not all CW-complexes are stratifications by this definition. Therefore, we define

4

HANNAH ALPERT

a generalized stratification of a space to be any partition with the following
property. If a stratum S intersects the closure S ′ of another stratum S ′ , then we
write S ′ → S, pronounced as “S ′ limits to S”. In order for the partition to be a
generalized stratification, we require that the resulting directed graph on the set of
strata have no directed cycles. In this case, the directed graph generates a partial
order on strata: we write S  S ′ whenever there is a directed path from S ′ to S.
If neither S  S ′ nor S ′  S, then we say the two strata are incomparable. In
this paper we usually assume that strata are connected; given an arbitrary generalized stratification, the set of connected components of strata is also a generalized
stratification.
The stratified simplicial norm, like the simplicial norm, is an infimum of sums
of coefficients, but the infimum is taken over only those cycles c that are consistent
with the (generalized) stratification, in the following sense:
• The cellular condition requires that for each simplex of c, the image of the
interior of each face (of any dimension) must be contained in one stratum.
• The order condition requires that the image of each simplex of c must be
contained in a totally ordered chain of strata; that is, the simplex does not
intersect any two incomparable strata.
• The internality condition requires that for each simplex of c, if the boundary
of a face (of any dimension) maps into a stratum S, then the whole face
maps into S.
For technical reasons, we also require a fourth condition, which is stated in terms
a space Σ that is constructed from c as follows. Let j be the dimension of c, and
let ∆j denote the abstract j-simplex. For each singular simplex σi : ∆j → X
appearing in c, there are j + 1 face maps from ∆j−1 to X obtained by restricting
σi . We form Σ by taking one copy of ∆j for each σi and identifying the faces
that have the same face map. (A similar construction appears on pages 108–109
of Hatcher’s textbook [Hat02].) Note that every face must be glued to at least one
other face, because otherwise it would appear with nonzero coefficient in the linear
combination ∂c of face maps, contradicting the cycle hypothesis ∂c = 0. Then we
can view c as a triple (Σ, cΣ , σ), where cΣ is a simplicial cycle on Σ, and σ : Σ → X
is a continuous map such that c = σ∗ cΣ . Note that the space Σ is not necessarily
an honest simplicial complex, linearly embeddable in Euclidean space, but is what
Hatcher calls a ∆-complex, which may have (for instance) edges in its 1-skeleton
that are self-loops (i.e., both endpoints are the same vertex). The fourth condition
is the following.
• The loop condition requires that for every edge in the 1-skeleton of Σ that
is a self-loop, its image in X must be a single point.
In the papers [Gro09] and [AK15], the stratified simplicial norm of a homology
class is the infimal sum of coefficients of cycles that represent the homology class
and satisfy the conditions above. In this paper, we only count the simplices for
which every vertex is in a different stratum; these are called essential simplices, a
term whichPis defined in a slightly more general context later in the paper. For any
cycle c =
ri σi (where σi are singular simplices and ri are real coefficients) and
generalized stratification S, let kckS∆,ess be defined by
X
|ri | .
kckS∆,ess =
essential σi

SIMPLICIAL VOLUME AND MORSE BROKEN TRAJECTORIES

5

The essential stratified simplicial norm of a homology class h with respect
to a generalized stratification S, denoted khkS∆,ess , is the infimum of kckS∆,ess taken
over all cycles c representing h that satisfy the cellular, order, internality, and loop
conditions. When h is a relative homology class, the essential stratified simplicial
norm is defined in the same way, as an infimum over relative cycles.
The goal of this section is the following lemma.
Lemma 3. Let X be a finite CW-complex. For any homology class h ∈ Hj (X), let
hrel denote the corresponding relative homology class in Hj (X, X j−1 ). Let S denote
the generalized stratification of X consisting of the open cells of the CW structure.
Let Z be any topological space such that the universal cover is contractible, and let
α : X → Z be a continuous map. Then the simplicial norm of the class α∗ h ∈ Hj (Z)
satisfies the bound
kα∗ hk∆ ≤ khrel kS∆,ess .
To prove this Lemma 3, we prove the Generalized Localization Lemma (Lemma 6),
for which Lemma 3 and the Localization Lemma of [Gro09] are special cases. The
proof is very similar to the proof of the Localization Lemma (given with more detail in [AK15]), and it relies on the Amenable Reduction Lemma of [Gro09]. There
is one main way in which the proof of the Generalized Localization Lemma goes
beyond what is needed for Lemma 3. A hypothesis involving amenable groups appears in the Amenable Reduction Lemma and the Generalized Localization Lemma
because it is a hypothesis in the Localization Lemma; however, in Lemma 3 these
amenable groups are zero because they are the fundamental groups of the cells of
the CW-complex. Thus, for the proofs of Lemma 3 and the main theorem of this paper, it suffices to substitute “zero” wherever “amenable group” appears throughout
this section.
In order to state the Amenable Reduction Lemma, we need to define the notion
of partial coloring. Let c be a cycle, viewed as the triple (Σ, cΣ , σ). By a partial
coloring of c we mean a list V1 , V2 , . . . , Vℓ , . . . of disjoint subsets of the set of
vertices of Σ. According to the partial coloring we classify each simplex as either
essential or non-essential; the non-essential simplices are the ones that can be made
to disappear in a certain sense. A simplex ∆ of Σ is a non-essential simplex of c if
either of the following conditions holds:
• ∆ has two distinct vertices in the same Vℓ (the vertices are permitted to
have the same image in X as long as they are distinct in Σ); or
• ∆ has two vertices that are the same point of Σ, and the edge between
them is a null-homotopic loop in X.
An essential simplex of c is any simplex ∆ of Σ that is not non-essential; that
is, ∆ is essential if in the 1-skeleton of ∆ in Σ, every vertex is in a different Vℓ , and
any edges that are self-loops map to non-contractible loops in X. In particular,
any simplex ∆ with vertices in dim(∆) + 1 different sets Vℓ is essential. (In the
definition of essential stratified simplicial norm, the essential simplices were defined
according to the partial coloring by strata; there, the loop condition replaces the
second condition for essential simplex.)
Let Z be a space with contractible universal cover and let α : X → Z be a
continuous map that sends all vertices of c in X to the same point of Z. Let Γℓ
denote the subgroup of π1 (Z) generated by the α-images of the edges of c for which
both endpoints are in Vℓ .

6

HANNAH ALPERT

Lemma 4 (Amenable Reduction Lemma, p. 25 of [Gro09]). Let c be a cycle on X
with a partial coloring {Vℓ }, let Z and α : X → Z be as above, and suppose that Γℓ
is an amenable group for every ℓ. Then the simplicial norm
P of the α-image of the
homology class [c] ∈ H∗ (X) represented by the cycle c =
ri σi (where ri ∈ R are
coefficients and σi are simplices) satisfies the bound
X
|ri | .
kα∗ [c]k∆ ≤
essential σi

It is easier to use a more general version of this lemma, obtained by removing the
assumption that α : X → Z sends every vertex of c to the same point. Without this
assumption, Γℓ is not a well-defined subgroup of π1 (Z). Instead, for each ℓ let Σ1ℓ
denote the 1-dimensional subcomplex of Σ consisting of the edges for which both
endpoints are in Vℓ . Instead of assuming that Γℓ is an amenable group, we assume
that for each connected component of each Σ1ℓ , the image of its fundamental group
under the composition of the maps σ∗ : π1 (Σ1ℓ ) → π1 (X) and α∗ : π1 (X) → π1 (Z)
is an amenable group. (This image is well-defined only up to conjugation, because
base points are not specified.)
Corollary 5. Let c be a cycle on space X with partial coloring {Vℓ }. Suppose that
Z is a space with contractible universal cover, and let α : X → Z be a continuous
map such that for every connected component of every induced 1-complex Σ1ℓ of c,
the α-image of the fundamental group in π1 (Z) is an amenable group. Then the
simplicial norm
P of the α-image of the homology class [c] ∈ H∗ (X) represented by
the cycle c =
ri σi (where ri ∈ R are coefficients and σi are simplices) satisfies
the bound
X
kα∗ [c]k∆ ≤
|ri | .
σi essential

Proof. Without loss of generality we may assume that every induced 1-complex
Σ1ℓ is connected; this is because if we subdivide Vℓ according to the connected
components of Σ1ℓ , there is no change to which simplices are essential.
We view c as the triple (Σ, cΣ , σ) and homotope the map σ : Σ → X to a new map
σ ′ so that every vertex of Σ moves to the same point of X and the resulting group
Γℓ generated by the α ◦ σ ′ -images of the edges in Σ1ℓ is a subgroup of α∗ σ∗ π1 (Σ1ℓ ),
which we have assumed is amenable. Specifically, we choose one base point ∗ in X
and one base point ∗ℓ in each Σ1ℓ , and choose a path γℓ in X from σ(∗ℓ ) to ∗. Then
for each vertex v in Σ1ℓ we choose a path in Σ1ℓ from v to ∗ℓ . We homotope σ in a
small neighborhood of v in Σ so that v travels along the image in X of that path
to σ(∗ℓ ), and then along γℓ to ∗. We apply this sequence of homotopies to σ, one
for each vertex, to get some new map σ ′ .
For every edge in Σ1ℓ , the restriction of σ ′ to that edge is a loop in X which
is obtained by taking the σ-image of a loop in Σ1ℓ and conjugating by the path
γℓ . Thus, the subgroup Γℓ resulting from σ ′ is a subgroup of the conjugation of
α∗ σ∗ π1 (Σ1ℓ , ∗ℓ ) by α ◦ γℓ . We have assumed that α∗ σ∗ π1 (Σ1ℓ ) is an amenable group,
and every subgroup of an amenable group is amenable, so Γℓ is amenable. We may
now apply the Amenable Reduction Lemma (Lemma 4) to the cycle c′ = (Σ, cΣ , σ ′ ).

In [AK15] when proving the Localization Lemma from [Gro09], we assume that
the ambient space is a manifold and the strata are submanifolds; in that case the

SIMPLICIAL VOLUME AND MORSE BROKEN TRAJECTORIES

7

strata have tubular neighborhoods. To generalize the lemma to CW-complexes, we
define the NDR property, which generalizes the tubular neighborhood property and
is satisfied by CW-complexes. We say that a generalized stratification on a space X
has the NDR property if every stratum S is a neighborhood deformation retract,
in the following sense: there is a neighborhood US of S in X and a homotopy
H : US × [0, 1] → X such that the start map H0 : US → X is the inclusion, the
image H1 (US ) of the end map is contained in S, and the restriction Ht |S : S → X
to S at every time t is the inclusion.
Lemma 6 (Generalized Localization Lemma). Let X be a compact metrizable
space, and let S be a generalized stratification on X with the NDR property, such
that S has finitely many strata and each stratum is connected. Let Z be a space
with contractible universal cover, and suppose α : X → Z is a continuous map such
that for every stratum S, the group α∗ π1 (S) ⊆ π1 (Z) is amenable. Let h ∈ Hj (X)
be a homology class, and suppose that A is a closed subset of X such that among
the strata intersecting A, there is no totally ordered chain of more than j strata.
Let hrel be the image of h in Hj (X, A). Then the simplicial norm of α∗ h ∈ Hj (Z)
satisfies the bound
kα∗ hk∆ ≤ khrel kS∆,ess .
The idea of the proof is to take any relative cycle representing hrel ∈ Hj (X, A)
and extend it to a cycle representing h, by adding a chain in A with no essential simplices with respect to a partial coloring that comes from the stratification.
Then we apply Corollary 5 to show that the new non-essential simplices do not
contribute to the simplicial norm of α∗ h, thus finishing the proof. The following
sublemma states that any representative of hrel may be extended by a chain in A
to a representative of h.
Sublemma 7. Let (X, A) be a pair of spaces, let h ∈ Hj (X) be a homology class,
and let hrel ∈ Hj (X, A) be the corresponding relative homology class. Let crel be
any relative cycle such that [crel ] = hrel . Then there exists a chain cA in A such
that ∂cA = −∂crel (so crel + cA is a cycle in X) and [crel + cA ] = h.
Proof. The proof is by chasing the long exact sequence of homology for the pair
(X, A). By the exactness at Hj (X, A), we see that the class of ∂crel must be zero
in Hj−1 (A), so there is some chain c1 in A such that ∂c1 = ∂crel . By the exactness
at Hj (X), because h − [crel − c1 ] ∈ Hj (X) maps to zero in Hj (X, A) there is some
cycle c2 in A such that [c2 ] = h − [crel − c1 ]. We set cA = −c1 + c2 .

In order to construct a partial coloring on some chain cA in A such that there
are no essential simplices, we modify the strata to create a related partition of A,
and then color the vertices of cA according to which set of the partition they are
in. In the following sublemma we construct this partition of A.
Sublemma 8. Let X be a compact metric space, with a generalized stratification
satisfying the NDR property, such that there are finitely many strata. Let A be any
closed subset of X, and let ε > 0 be arbitrary. Then there exists a partition {PS } of
A, containing one subset PS for each stratum S, and δ > 0 such that the following
properties hold:
• For every stratum S, the set PS is contained in the ε-neighborhood of S.
• If S and S ′ are incomparable strata, then the distances dist(PS , PS ′ ), dist(PS , S ′ ),
and dist(S, PS ′ ) are all greater than δ.

8

HANNAH ALPERT

• For every stratum S, the δ-neighborhood of PS in A is contained in an NDR
neighborhood US of S in X.
Proof. We start by numbering the strata S1 , . . . , Sr such that if Sj  Si then j ≤ i.
We construct PSi in order, with a recursion
S assumption that if PSj have been
constructed for all j < i, then their union j<i PSj is an A-open neighborhood of

S
. To construct PSi , we let Ki be the complement
the (closed) union A ∩
S
j
j<i
S
of j<i PSj in A ∩ Si ; the set Ki is compact. If S ′ is any stratum so that its closure
S ′ is disjoint from Si (equivalently S ′ 6→ Si ), then S ′ has positive distance from
Ki . We select εi < ε such that 3εi is less than this positive distance for all such
strata S ′ and such that the 3εi -neighborhood N3εi (Ki ) (taken in A or X, it doesn’t
matter) is contained
in an NDR neighborhood USi of Si in X. We let PSi be the
S
complement of j<i PSj in A ∩ Nεi (Ki ). The recursion assumption is preserved:

S
S
the new union j≤i PSj is an A-open set containing A ∩
j≤i Sj .
Having constructed all PSi , we set δ < min εi and check that the construction
satisfies the three conclusions of the lemma. The first conclusion is true because PSi
is in the εi -neighborhood of Si . For the second conclusion, suppose that Si and Sj
are incomparable strata. Because Sj 6→ Si , all of Sj lies further than 3εi away from
Ki , whereas all of PSi lies within εi of Ki . Thus we have dist(PSi , Sj ) > 2εi > δ
and similarly dist(PSi , PSj ) > 2εi − εj . We may reverse the roles of Si and Sj if
necessary, to assume εi ≥ εj , in which case 2εi − εj > δ. The third conclusion is

true because Nδ (PSi ) ⊆ N3ε (Ki ) ⊆ USi .
We are almost ready for the proof of the Generalized Localization Lemma (Lemma 6).
First we record an easy sublemma that says that the cellular, order, internality, and
loop properties are preserved by barycentric subdivision.
Sublemma 9. Let X be a space with a generalized stratification, and let c =
(Σ, cΣ , σ) be a cycle satisfying the cellular property. Then the first barycentric
subdivision of c satisfies the cellular, order, internality, and loop properties.
Proof. The cellular property is immediate because every open face of the subdivision is contained in an open face of c. The order property is proven as follows.
In any simplex of c, if f is a face in the boundary of another face f ′ , and S and
S ′ are the strata of f and f ′ , then those strata are related by S ′ → S. Then in
the barycentric subdivision, every simplex is contained in a totally ordered chain
of faces, so the corresponding strata are also totally ordered. The internality property holds because in any face of the subdivision, the stratum of the interior also
appears as the stratum of one of the vertices (at least). The loop property holds
because the barycentric subdivision of any Σ is an honest simplicial complex with
no loops.

Proof of the Generalized Localization Lemma (Lemma 6). Let crel be a relative (X, A)
cycle that represents hrel and satisfies the cellular, order, internality, and loop conditions. We apply Sublemma 7 to get a chain cA in A such that crel + cA is a
cycle representing h. We apply Sublemma 8 to get a partition {PS } of A and a
number δ > 0. We construct, as input to Corollary 5, a cycle c = crel + c1 + c2 + cδ
representing h and a partial coloring on c with one subset of vertices Vℓ for each
stratum Sℓ , as follows:

SIMPLICIAL VOLUME AND MORSE BROKEN TRAJECTORIES

9

• To construct cδ , we start with cA and apply iterated barycentric subdivision
until the diameter of each simplex in X is less than δ. For each vertex v of
cδ , if v ∈ PSℓ , then v ∈ Vℓ .
• c2 is the cylinder −∂cδ × [0, 1], triangulated in such a way that no new
vertices are created, and mapped to X by the projection −∂cδ × [0, 1] →
−∂cδ . The vertices of −∂cδ ×1 are identified with the vertices of cδ , so their
partial coloring is determined by their membership in PSℓ . The vertices of
−∂cδ × 0 have a different partial coloring: if v ∈ Sℓ , then v ∈ Vℓ .
• c1 is a subdivision of the cylinder ∂crel × [0, 1], mapped to X by the projection ∂crel × [0, 1] → ∂crel . The end ∂crel × 0 is identified with ∂crel and is
not subdivided. The end ∂crel × 1 is divided by barycentric subdivision so
that it may be identified with the 0 end of c2 , which is equal to −∂cδ . The
middle of the cylinder is subdivided by concatenating the chain homotopies
corresponding to barycentric subdivision, one for each iteration. For each
vertex v of c1 , if v ∈ Sℓ , then v ∈ Vℓ .
• For every vertex v of crel , if v ∈ Sℓ , then v ∈ Vℓ .
First we verify that every simplex in c1 , c2 , and cδ is not essential. Any loops in
any of these chains are null-homotopic because of either the loop property on crel
or the barycentric subdivision as in Sublemma 9. To show that two of the j + 1
vertices of each simplex are labeled with the same subset Vℓ , we claim that for
every two vertices of a simplex, the strata Sℓ corresponding to their labels must
be comparable strata. In c1 this is true by the order property or Sublemma 9.
In cδ this is true because dist(PS , PS ′ ) > δ whenever S and S ′ are incomparable
strata. In c2 , to show that every two vertices in a simplex have labels corresponding
to comparable strata, there are three cases: if both vertices are in c1 , we use the
argument for c1 ; if both vertices are in cδ , we use the argument for cδ ; and if there
is one vertex in each, we use the fact that dist(S, PS ′ ) > δ whenever S and S ′ are
incomparable strata. Thus, for every simplex in c1 , c2 , and cδ , the j + 1 vertex
labels correspond to a totally ordered chain of strata intersecting A, and every such
chain has length at most j so two of the labels must be the same.
Let (Σ, cΣ , σ) be the simplicial complex structure of c. Next we show that for
every Vℓ , the induced 1-complex Σ1ℓ in Σ is homotopic in X to something with image
in Sℓ . Then the α-image of the fundamental group of every connected component
of Σ1ℓ is a subgroup of the α-image of the fundamental group of Sℓ , which we
have assumed to be an amenable group; any subgroup of an amenable group is
also amenable. We homotope Σ1ℓ into Sℓ by showing that it is included in the
NDR neighborhood USℓ , which homotopes into Sℓ . Indeed, every edge in Σ1ℓ is in
Sℓ ∪ Nδ (PSℓ ), where Nδ denotes the δ-neighborhood: if the edge is in crel or c1 ,
then both endpoints are in Sℓ , so the edge is in Sℓ by the internality condition or
Sublemma 9; if the edge is in c2 or cδ but not in c1 , then at least one endpoint is
in PSℓ , and the whole simplex has diameter less than δ, so the edge is in Nδ (PSℓ ).
So we have
Σ1ℓ ⊆ Sℓ ∪ Nδ (PSℓ ) ⊆ USℓ ,
and thus the whole 1-complex may be homotoped into Sℓ .
Now every hypothesis of Corollary 5 is satisfied, so we apply that corollary to
obtain
kα∗ hk∆ ≤ kcrel kS∆,ess .


10

HANNAH ALPERT

Proof of Lemma 3. First we observe that the generalized stratification of a CWcomplex by open cells satisfies the NDR property: every skeleton X i is a neighborhood deformation retract in the next skeleton X i+1 , so if S is a cell, we obtain the
NDR neighborhood US by taking the preimage of S under the composition of all
such retractions that have i at least the dimension of S.
Every stratum is contractible, so its fundamental group is zero and hence amenable.
We take A = X j−1 , in which there is no totally ordered chain of more than j strata.
Applying the Generalized Localization Lemma (Lemma 6) finishes the proof.

3. Morse theory machinery
We begin by briefly summarizing the significance of the Morse-Smale condition;
all of this information can be found in the book [BH04]. An example of a Morse
function that is not Morse-Smale is obtained by taking the height function of a
torus T 2 stood on end, as in Figure 1. The pair of index-1 critical points violates
the transversality condition, because there is flow between them: the descending
manifold of the upper point and the ascending manifold of the lower point both have
dimension 1, and their intersection in the 2-dimensional surface has dimension 1,
so it is not transverse. More generally, if D(p) and A(p) have a transverse and nonempty intersection, then the intersection has dimension ind(p) − ind(q), which in
particular must be strictly positive because the intersection contains 1-dimensional
flow lines. Thus, in a Morse-Smale flow, for every flow line the starting critical
point must have index strictly greater than the ending critical point.
If we tilt the torus slightly, then the height function becomes Morse-Smale. In
fact, every gradient vector field may be approximated in C ∞ by a Morse-Smale
gradient vector field (this is called the Kupka-Smale theorem), and every C 1 -small
perturbation of a Morse-Smale gradient vector field is still Morse-Smale (this is a
theorem of Palis). On the tilted torus, each of the index-1 critical points has two
flow lines up to the index-2 critical point and two flow lines down to the index0 critical point, as shown in Figure 1, giving eight 2-part broken trajectories in
all. (Of course, the main theorem says nothing about this example because the
torus does not admit a hyperbolic metric.) It is not obvious in general that there
are only finitely many flow lines between critical points of index difference 1; this
theorem is part of a larger family of compactness results, which say that the space
of flow lines can be compactified by adding in the broken trajectories (with some
appropriate notion of convergence). The usual reason to count flow lines between
critical points of index difference 1 is because they define the differential in the
Morse-Smale-Witten chain complex, which is a chain complex in which the set of
k-chains is freely generated by the critical points of index k. The homology of the
Morse-Smale-Witten complex is called Morse homology, and it is isomorphic to the
singular homology of the manifold. In that setting the flow lines are counted with
signs determined by orientations of the descending manifolds. In this paper we
count the flow lines without any sign and do not use Morse homology.
Now we turn from the background to the specific theorems of Morse theory that
are needed for the main theorem. Let (M, g) be a closed Riemannian manifold,
and let f : (M, g) → R be a Morse function satisfying Morse-Smale transversality.
We would like to say that the descending manifolds D(p) are the open cells of a
nice CW-complex structure on M , in which the incidences between cells correspond
somehow to breaking of trajectories and there is a triangulation that agrees with

SIMPLICIAL VOLUME AND MORSE BROKEN TRAJECTORIES

11

f

Figure 1. The height function of a standard torus stood on end,
shown on the left, is not Morse-Smale because there is flow between the two index-1 critical points. A slight perturbation of this
function, shown on the right, is Morse-Smale and has eight 2-part
broken trajectories. (The picture is modeled on one in [BH04].)
the CW-complex structure. This wish is mostly true, but in the proof, the necessary
analysis requires a special condition at the critical points.
The pair (f, g) is said to be Euclidean if at every critical point p, there is a
neighborhood with coordinates (x1 , x2 ) ∈ Rind(p) × Rn−ind(p) such that g is equal
to the standard Euclidean metric and f is given by
1
1
f (x1 , x2 ) = f (p) − |x1 |2 + |x2 |2 .
2
2
(Here, p has coordinates (x1 , x2 ) = (0, 0).) We reduce the general case to the
Euclidean case, and then work only in the Euclidean case; in [Weh12], Wehrheim
justifies this reduction, which was stated by Franks in [Fra79] (or, see [Qin11] for a
longer discussion).
Theorem 10 (Remark 3.6 in [Weh12]). Let M be a closed manifold, and let Ψs
be the flow along some Morse-Smale negative gradient vector field. Then there is
a homeomorphism h : M → M such that hΨs h−1 is the flow along a Morse-Smale
negative gradient vector field which in addition is Euclidean.
In particular, the number of n-part broken trajectories of hΨs h−1 is equal to
the number of n-part broken trajectories of Ψs , so to prove the main theorem
(Theorem 1) it suffices to consider the case where (f, g) is Euclidean. The goal of
this section is the following lemma.
Lemma 11. Let (M, g) be a closed Riemannian manifold of dimension n, and
suppose f : (M, g) → R is Morse-Smale and Euclidean. Let S be the partition into
descending manifolds D(p). Then M is a CW-complex for which the generalized
stratification by open cells is equal to S, and for each descending manifold D(p)
of dimension n, the corresponding relative homology class [D(p)] ∈ Hn (M, M n−1 )
satisfies the bound
k[D(p)]kS∆,ess ≤ #(n-part broken trajectories beginning at p).

12

HANNAH ALPERT

We use Lizhen Qin’s exposition [Qin10] as the reference for the Morse theory
results; it presents self-contained proofs for a collection of Morse theory folk theorems. In order to make M into a CW-complex, the goal is to construct spaces
D(p) each homeomorphic to a closed ball with interior D(p), and maps D(p) → M
for which the restriction to D(p) is the inclusion. In the following discussion we fix
notation necessary for describing the structure of D(p).
For any two critical points p and q, there is a smooth manifold M(p, q) which is
the set of all unparametrized flow lines from p to q. Let I = {r0 , r1 , . . . , rk+1 } be a
list of critical points, with
ind(r0 ) > ind(r1 ) > · · · > ind(rk+1 ).
The product manifolds MI and DI are defined by
MI =

k
Y

M(ri , ri+1 ),

DI = MI × D(rk+1 ).

i=0

The length of I is defined to be |I| = k, which is two less than the number of critical
points in I. Then the spaces M(p, q) and D(p) can be compactified as
G
G
M(p, q) =
MI , D(p) =
DI ,
I

I

where in M(p, q) each I is required to begin with p and end with q, and in D(p)
each I is required to begin with p. Figure 2 depicts D(p) in an example where p is
an index-2 critical point of a Morse-Smale function on S 2 .
The theorems that describe the topology of these compactifications show that
they are smooth manifolds with corners; a smooth manifold with corners of
dimension n is defined by an atlas of open subsets of [0, ∞)n with smooth diffeomorphisms as transition functions. The set of points that have exactly k coordinates
equal to zero (in any chart) is a manifold of dimension n − k, and we refer to it as
the codimension-k part. A smooth manifold with faces is a smooth manifold
with corners such that for every k, every point of the codimension-k part belongs
to the closures of k different connected components of the codimension-1 part.
The description of D(p) relies on the description of M(p, q).
Theorem 12 (Theorem 3.3 of [Qin10]). Let (M, g) be a closed Riemannian manifold and suppose f : (M, g) → R is Morse-Smale and Euclidean. Then for every
pair of critical points (p, q), there is a smooth structure on M(p, q) which satisfies
the following properties:
• It
F is a compact smooth manifold with faces, and the codimension-k part is
|I|=k MI .
• The smooth structure is compatible with that of each MI .
• For any critical point r with ind(p) > ind(r) > ind(q), the concatenation
map M(p, r) × M(r, q) → M(p, q) is a smooth embedding.
Theorem 13 (Theorem 3.4 of [Qin10]). Let (M, g) be a closed Riemannian manifold and suppose f : (M, g) → R is Morse-Smale and Euclidean. Then for every
critical point p, there is a smooth structure on D(p) which satisfies the following
properties:
• It
F is a compact smooth manifold with faces, and the codimension-k part is
|I|=k−1 DI .

SIMPLICIAL VOLUME AND MORSE BROKEN TRAJECTORIES

13

p
f

a

b

c

M(p, b) × M(b, c) × D(c)

M(p, c) × D(c)

D(p)

M(p, b) × D(b)

M(p, b) × M(b, c) × D(c)
Figure 2. In this example the vertical coordinate gives a MorseSmale function on S 2 , shown in the upper picture. The compactified disk D(p), shown in the lower picture, consists of the following
parts: the open 2-cell D(p), the open segments M(p, b) × D(b) and
M(p, c) × D(c), and the pair of points M(p, b) × M(b, c) × D(c).
Under the evaluation map e : D(p) → S 2 , the entire closed segment M(p, c) × D(c), shown as the left-hand boundary of the disk,
collapses to the point c.
• The smooth structure is compatible with that of each DI .
• For any critical point r with ind(p) > ind(r), the concatenation map M(p, r)×
D(r) → D(p) is a smooth embedding.
• The evaluation map e : D(p) → M is smooth, where the restriction of e on
DI = MI × D(rk+1 ) is the coordinate projection onto D(rk+1 ) ⊆ M .
To make M into a CW-complex, what remains is to show that D(p) with this
topology is homeomorphic to a closed ball.
Theorem 14 (Theorem 3.7 of [Qin10]). Let (M, g) be a closed Riemannian manifold and suppose f : (M, g) → R is Morse-Smale and Euclidean. Let Dk denote
the closed ball of dimension k, and let S k−1 denote its boundary. Then for every
critical point p there is a homeomorphism between the pair (D(p), ∂D(p)) and the
pair (Dind(p) , S ind(p)−1 ).

14

HANNAH ALPERT

In order to prove the main lemma of this section, Lemma 11, we want to find
a triangulation of each n-dimensional cell D(p) that satisfies the cellular, order,
internality, and loop properties and does not have too many essential simplices.
Let S1 denote the stratification of D(p) consisting of the connected components of
the codimension-k part for each k. We will first find a finite triangulation of D(p)
with the cellular property with respect to S1 ; an iterated barycentric subdivision of
this triangulation satisfies all four properties by Sublemma 9, and the next lemma
counts the number of essential simplices with respect to S1 . Figure 3 depicts an
example triangulation of the disk D(p) from Figure 2, labeled with its essential
simplices.
Lemma 15. Let X = [0, ∞)n , and let S1 be the stratification of X consisting of
the connected components of the codimension-k part for each k. Let c1 be a finite
triangulation of the closure of a neighborhood of 0 in X, satisfying the cellular
property with respect to S1 , and let c2 denote the first barycentric subdivision of c1 .
Then the map sending each simplex of c2 to the list of strata of its vertices induces
a bijection
essential simplices of c2 ↔ totally ordered chains of n + 1 strata.
Proof. The proof is by induction on n. The base case is n = 0, in which case X is
one point. For n > 0, we apply the inductive hypothesis to each (n−1)-dimensional
face of X with the induced triangulation. The resulting essential (n − 1)-simplices
of c2 ∩ ∂X are in bijection with the totally ordered chains of n strata in ∂X. There
is only one n-dimensional stratum, which we append to the totally ordered chains of
n strata in ∂X to get the totally ordered chains of n + 1 strata in X. An n-simplex
of X is essential if and only if it has one vertex in the interior of X and the opposite
face is an essential (n − 1)-simplex of ∂X; there is exactly one such n-simplex of c2
for each (n − 1)-simplex of c2 ∩ ∂X. Thus the essential n-simplices are in bijection
with the totally ordered chains of n + 1 strata in X.

We use the following easy lemma to show that when counting totally ordered
chains of n + 1 strata, it is equivalent to count them globally on D(p) or locally
near the vertices.
Lemma 16. Let D be an n-dimensional compact smooth manifold with faces. Let v
be a vertex of the codimension-n part, and let U be a neighborhood of v corresponding
to a ball around 0 in [0, ∞)n . Then for every k, the connected components of
the codimension-k part of U all come from different connected components of the
codimension-k part of D.
Proof. Every point x in the codimension-k part can be labeled by which k connected
components of the codimension-1 part of D have closure containing x. This labeling
is constant as x varies within a connected component of the codimension-k part
of D. Coming together at v, there are n different connected components of the
codimension-1 part of D, so in U every connected component of the codimension-k
part gets a different label. Thus none of them can be part of the same connected
component of the codimension-k part of D.

The final ingredient needed to prove Lemma 11, which is the goal of this section,
is the following lemma. It relates the stratification S1 , which comes from the
structure of D(p) as a manifold with corners, to the generalized stratification of

SIMPLICIAL VOLUME AND MORSE BROKEN TRAJECTORIES

15

M(p, b) × M(b, c)
σ1

σ2

M(p, c)

M(p, b) × D(b)

σ3

σ4

M(p, b) × M(b, c)
Figure 3. In this stratified triangulation c2 of the disk D(p) from
Figure 2, the essential simplices with respect to stratification S1
(which consists of an open 2-cell, two open 1-cells, and two 0-cells)
are σ1 , σ2 , σ3 , and σ4 . The essential simplices with respect to
generalized stratification S2 (which consists of an open 2-cell, an
open 1-cell shown on the right boundary, and a closed 1-cell shown
on the left boundary) are σ2 and σ4 only.
M corresponding to its CW structure. Specifically, consider the evaluation map
e : D(p) → M from Theorem 13, and let S2 be the generalized stratification of
D(p) consisting of the space e−1 (D(r)) = M(p, r) × D(r) for each critical point r.
Note that every stratum of S2 is a union of strata from S1 . Figure 3 illustrates the
fact that some simplices are essential with respect to S1 but are not essential with
respect to S2 .
Lemma 17. Let (M, g) be a closed Riemannian manifold and suppose f : (M, g) →
R is Morse-Smale and Euclidean. Let p be any critical point. Let S1 be the stratification of D(p) consisting of the connected components of the codimension-k part for
each k, and let S2 be the stratification of D(p) consisting of the space M(p, r)×D(r)
for each critical point r. Then the number of totally ordered chains of ind(p) + 1
strata from S1 such that those strata belong to ind(p) + 1 different strata from S2
is the number of ind(p)-part broken trajectories starting at p.
Proof. Roughly, a totally ordered chain of ind(p) + 1 strata from S1 corresponds
to an increasing sequence of sets of critical points at which the flow lines from p
may break. For such a set of critical points, the corresponding stratum of S2 is
determined by the critical point of least index. Thus, in order to get ind(p) + 1
different strata from S2 , the critical points must be added in decreasing order of
index. The number of ways to make such a chain of S1 -strata is the number of
ind(p)-part broken trajectories.
The proof is by induction on ind(p). The base case is ind(p) = 0, in which case
D(p) is one point. For ind(p) > 0, every totally ordered chain of ind(p) + 1 strata
from S1 consists of the maximal stratum D(p) along with some totally ordered
chain of ind(p) strata with maximum equal to some codimension-1 stratum. We
know that the codimension-1 part of D(p) consists of various M(p, r) × D(r), where
r is a critical point with ind(r) < ind(p).

16

HANNAH ALPERT

If ind(r) = ind(p) − 1, then M(p, r) is a finite set. We know that concatenation gives an embedding M(p, r) × D(r) → D(p), by Theorem 13. The space
M(p, r) × D(r) = M(p, r) × D(r) is a finite disjoint union of copies of D(r),
so any totally ordered chain of strata with maximum equal to some stratum in
M(p, r) × D(r) is completely contained in one of the copies of D(r). We apply the
inductive hypothesis to each D(r). Then, the S2 -stratum D(p) is different from
every S2 -stratum intersecting any D(r), so the number of totally ordered chains of
ind(p) + 1 strata from S1 , with maximum D(p) and next stratum in M(p, r) × D(r),
such that these strata belong to ind(p) + 1 different strata from S2 , is the number
of (ind(p) + 1)-part broken trajectories starting with p and then r.
If, on the other hand, ind(r) < ind(p) − 1, then as before we have an embedding
M(p, r) × D(r) → D(p). We claim that in M(p, r) × D(r) there are no totally
ordered chains of ind(p) strata from S1 such that these strata belong to ind(p)
different strata from S2 . First we observe that if two strata S and S ′ of S1 are
related by S  S ′ , then the strata of S2 containing S and S ′ satisfy the same
relation. Thus for every totally ordered chain of strata from S1 , the corresponding
strata from S2 are also totally ordered. We also observe that for any two critical
points q1 and q2 of the same index, the corresponding S2 -strata M(p, q1 ) × D(q1 )
and M(p, q2 ) × D(q2 ) are incomparable. This implies that the maximum possible
length of a totally ordered chain of S2 -strata intersecting M(p, r)×D(r) is ind(r)+1,
which is less than ind(p).
Thus, back in D(p), for every totally ordered chain of ind(p) + 1 strata from
S1 such that those strata belong to ind(p) + 1 different strata from S2 , the nextto-maximum stratum is in M(p, r) × D(r) for some critical point r with ind(r) =
ind(p) − 1. Adding up the number of ways to do this for all such r, the total is the
number of ind(p)-part broken trajectories starting at p.


Proof of Lemma 11. Theorems 13 and 14 imply that M is a CW-complex with the
descending manifolds as open cells. As a smooth manifold with corners, each D(p)
is a Whitney stratified space and therefore has a stratified triangulation (see [Gor78]
and [GM88]; the former includes a definition of stratified triangulation, and the latter includes a definition of Whitney stratified space). The stratified triangulation
satisfies the cellular property with respect to S1 , and there are finitely many simplices because D(p) is compact. Let crel (p) be an iterated barycentric subdivision
of this original triangulation.
By Sublemma 9, the relative (D(p), ∂D(p)) cycle crel (p) satisfies the cellular,
order, internality, and loop properties with respect to S1 , so it also satisfies these
four properties with respect to S2 , or equivalently, as a relative (M, M n−1 ) cycle
with respect to S. By Lemmas 15 and 16, the triangulation crel (p) has one essential
simplex with respect to S1 for each totally ordered chain of n + 1 strata from S1 , so
by Lemma 17, crel (p) has one essential simplex with respect to S2 (or equivalently
S) for each n-part broken trajectory beginning at p. Thus we have
k[D(p)]kS∆,ess ≤ kcrel (p)kS∆,ess = #(n-part broken trajectories beginning at p).


SIMPLICIAL VOLUME AND MORSE BROKEN TRAJECTORIES

17

4. Main theorem
The main theorem, Theorem 1, is an immediate corollary of the following theorem. This more general theorem bounds the number of n-part broken trajectories
in terms of the simplicial volume, instead of the hyperbolic volume, so it applies to
all closed manifolds with nonzero simplicial volume.
Theorem 18. Let M be a closed, oriented manifold of dimension n. Let g be a
Riemannian metric on M , and let f : (M, g) → R be a Morse function satisfying
Morse-Smale transversality. Let Z be any topological space such that its universal
cover is contractible, and let α : M → Z be a continuous map. Then the fundamental homology class [M ] has α-image in Hn (Z) with simplicial norm satisfying
the bound
kα∗ [M ]k∆ ≤ #(n-part broken trajectories of −∇f ).
Proof. By Theorem 10 we may assume that (f, g) is Euclidean. Let S denote
the generalized stratification of M corresponding to the CW structure from the
descending manifolds. The relative class [M ]rel ∈ Hn (M, M n−1 ) corresponding to
[M ] is equal to the sum of n-cells
X
[D(p)],
[M ]rel =
ind(p)=n

and so by Lemma 11 its essential stratified simplicial norm satisfies the bound
X
k[D(p)]kS∆,ess ≤ #(n-part broken trajectories).
k[M ]rel kS∆,ess ≤
ind(p)=n

Applying Lemma 3, we have the inequality
kα∗ [M ]k∆ ≤ k[M ]rel kS∆,ess ,
which proves the theorem.



Proof of Theorem 1. Suppose M is hyperbolic. For Z we take M , and for α : M →
Z we take the identity map on M . Combining Theorem 18 with the formula relating
simplicial norm to hyperbolic volume, we obtain
Vol(M, hyp)
= k[M ]k∆ ≤ #(n-part broken trajectories).
Vol ∆n

References
[AK15] H. Alpert and G. Katz, Using simplicial volume to count multi-tangent trajectories of
traversing vector fields, http://arxiv.org/pdf/1503.02583v1.pdf, 2015.
[BH04] A. Banyaga and D. Hurtubise, Lectures on Morse homology, Kluwer Texts in the Mathematical Sciences, vol. 29, Kluwer Academic Publishers Group, Dordrecht, 2004.
[Fra79] J. Franks, Morse-Smale flows and homotopy theory, Topology 18 (1979), no. 3, 199–215.
[GM88] M. Goresky and R. MacPherson, Stratified Morse theory, Ergebnisse der Mathematik
und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3) [Results in Mathematics and Related Areas (3)], vol. 14,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1988.
[Gor78] M. Goresky, Triangulation of stratified objects, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 72 (1978), no. 1,
193–200.
[Gro82] M. Gromov, Volume and bounded cohomology, Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 56
(1982), 5–99.
[Gro09]
, Singularities, expanders and topology of maps. I. Homology versus volume in
the spaces of cycles, Geom. Funct. Anal. 19 (2009), no. 3, 743–841.

18

HANNAH ALPERT

[Hat02] A. Hatcher, Algebraic topology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002.
[LS06] J.-F. Lafont and B. Schmidt, Simplicial volume of closed locally symmetric spaces of
non-compact type, Acta Math. 197 (2006), no. 1, 129–143.
[Qin10] Lizhen Qin, On moduli spaces and CW structures arising from Morse theory on Hilbert
manifolds, J. Topol. Anal. 2 (2010), no. 4, 469–526.
,
An
application
of
topological
equivalence
to
Morse
theory,
[Qin11]
http://arxiv.org/pdf/1102.2838v1.pdf, 2011.
[Thu98] W. Thurston, Hyperbolic structures on 3-manifolds, II: Surface groups and 3-manifolds
which fiber over the circle, http://arxiv.org/pdf/math/9801045v1.pdf, 1998.
[Weh12] K. Wehrheim, Smooth structures on Morse trajectory spaces, featuring finite ends and
associative gluing, Proceedings of the Freedman Fest, Geom. Topol. Monogr., vol. 18,
Geom. Topol. Publ., Coventry, 2012, pp. 369–450.
MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
E-mail address: hcalpert@math.mit.edu

