arXiv:1510.04265v5 [math.SG] 20 Sep 2017

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON
OPEN MANIFOLDS
YOEL GROMAN

Abstract. We construct Hamiltonian Floer complexes associated to
continuous, and even lower semi-continuous, time dependent exhaustion
functions on geometrically bounded symplectic manifolds. We further
construct functorial continuation maps associated to monotone homotopies between them, and operations which give rise to a product and
unit. The work rests on novel techniques for energy confinement of Floer
solutions as well as on methods of Non-Archimedean analysis. The definition for general Hamiltonians utilizes the notion of reduced cohomology familiar from Riemannian geometry, and the continuity properties of
Floer cohomology. This gives rise in particular to localized Floer theory.
We discuss various functorial properties as well as some applications to
existence of periodic orbits and to displaceability.

Contents
1. Introduction
1.1. The main results
1.2. Localized Floer theory
1.3. Symplectic cohomology
1.4. Liouville domains and displaceability
1.5. Organization of the paper
1.6. Acknowledgements
2. The main results: a detailed statement
2.1. Reduced Floer cohomology
3. Diameter control of Floer trajectories: an overview
4. I-bounded almost complex structures
5. Floer solutions and the Gromov metric
5.1. The Floer-Novikov covering and Floer’s equation
5.2. The Gromov metric
5.3. Completeness
5.4. Curvature
5.5. Injectivity radius
5.6. Some criteria for boundedness
6. Loopwise dissipativity
6.1. Diameter control of Floer trajectories
6.2. Loopwise dissipativity
6.3. Bidirectedness
1

2
3
5
7
9
10
10
11
13
16
17
24
24
25
28
29
31
32
34
34
36
39

2

YOEL GROMAN

6.4. Dissipativity on exact symplectic manifolds
6.5. Some non-exact examples
7. Proof of Theorem 2.1
7.1. Floer systems
7.2. Transversality and control of bubbling
7.3. Floer’s Theorem
8. Reduced Hamiltonian Floer homology
8.1. Reduced homology
8.2. Floer cohomology of lower semi-continuous exhaustion
functions
8.3. The chain level construction
8.4. The product structure
8.5. Symplectic cohomology
9. Computations and applications
9.1. Liouville domains
9.2. Mapping Tori
9.3. The Kunneth formula for split Hamiltonians
9.4. The Kunneth formula for universal symplectic cohomology
9.5. Vanishing results
9.6. Existence of periodic orbits
References

41
42
44
44
47
49
52
52
54
57
60
63
65
65
68
70
71
72
73
75

1. Introduction
Let (M, ω) be a symplectic manifold. Floer theory is a machine that associates algebraic structures to objects of symplectic geometry on M . Over the
years, it has come to play central role in all aspects of the field, from mirror
symmetry to quantitative symplectic geometry. In this paper we extend the
range of applicability of Floer theory, focusing on Hamiltonian Floer theory,
to geometrically bounded, or tame, symplectic manifolds. As a byproduct
we obtain Floer chain complexes for lower semi-continuous Hamiltonians, a
result which is interesting also on closed manifolds.
There is a vast literature employing Hamiltonian Floer theory both on
open manifolds and for indicator functions of various sets utilizing ad-hoc
constructions or making restrictive assumptions. However, there are numerous settings of central importance which are not covered by the existing
literature. To name a few, we have magnetic cotangent bundles and, more
generally, twisted Liouville domains, coadjoint orbits of noncompact groups,
Hitchin moduli spaces, and complements of an anti-canonical divisor in toric
Calabi-Yau varieties. The study of the wrapped Fukaya category in these
settings would contribute to our understanding of mirror symmetry, the geometric Langlands program, and to many branches of symplectic topology.
It should be emphasized that while we do not mention the Fukaya category elsewhere in this paper, the difficulties posed by non-compactness are

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

3

virtually the same for the Hamiltonian version of Floer theory as for its Lagrangian intersection version. Thus, this paper sets the stage for the study of
the (wrapped) Fukaya category on open manifolds such as those mentioned
above insofar as one can overcome the usual difficulties already present in
the closed case.
The results here provide a unified and flexible framework which incorporates the various constructions in the literature (e.g.,[5, 35, 21, 24]), works
in full generality, and has transparent symplectic invariance properties. We
shall assume familiarity with the basic machinery of Hamiltonian Floer theory and symplectic cohomology such as can be acquired from the first three
lectures in [26] together with [20]. For the discussion of the product structure we shall assume also some familiarity with treatments such as [2] or
[25]. The latter is not necessary for most of the novel ideas in this paper.
1.1. The main results. A symplectic manifold (M, ω) is said to be geometrically bounded if there is an ω-compatible almost complex structure
J, a constant C > 1, and a complete Riemannian metric g with sectional
curvature bounded from above and injectivity radius bounded away from 0
such that
1
g(v, v) ≤ ω(v, Jv) ≤ Cg(v, v).
C
Note that the almost complex structure J is not part of the data. Examples include closed symplectic manifolds, cotangent bundles of arbitrary
smooth manifolds, manifolds whose end is modeled after the convex half of
the symplectization of a compact contact manifold [29], twisted cotangent
bundles[8], and many more. The class of tame symplectic manifolds is closed
under products and coverings.
Remark 1.1. It should be emphasized that an open symplectic manifold
of finite volume, such as the unit ball in Cn , cannot be endowed with a
metric that is at once complete and satisfies the above bounds on sectional
curvature and radius of injectivity and thus is not geometrically bounded.
Floer theory for open finite volume symplectic manifolds, such as Liouville
domains, will be discussed, in the context of localized Floer homology, when
they are embedded in a geometrically bounded symplectic manifold.
Henceforth, (M, ω) is a semi-positive and geometrically bounded. Namely,
denoting by c1 the first Chern class of M , for any class A ∈ π2 (M ) we have
3 − n ≤ c1 (A) < 0

⇒

ω(A) ≤ 0.

We hasten to emphasize that this is assumption is made for definiteness
only. The methods introduced herein are orthogonal to the usual questions
of transversality and can be adapted to any regularization scheme.
Fix a field R and denote by ΛR the universal Novikov field and by ΛR,ω
the Novikov field associated with ω. See §7.3. We shall use the notation
K to denote either ΛR or ΛR,ω . In the entire text, ΛR coefficients should

4

YOEL GROMAN

be assumed by default whenever the coefficient field is not indicated in the
notation.
The precise statement of the main results requires some preparation. We
therefore present first an informal statement which can be seen as the main
theorem. In §2 we give an extended presentation and discussion.
Theorem 1.2. To each proper lower semi-continuous Hamiltonian H on
M which is bounded below, one can associate in a natural way a non∗
Archimedean K-Banach space HF (H; K) which specializes to (reduced) Floer
cohomology when the latter is well defined. Given H1 ≤ H2 there is a functorial map
∗
∗
HF (H1 ; K) → HF (H2 ; K).
∗

Moreover, HF (H; K) arises as the reduced cohomology of a certain Banach
chain complex which is associated to H up to an appropriate notion of quasiisomorphism, and which specialize to the Floer chain complex when the latter
is well defined.
Theorem 1.2 is reformulated more precisely in §2 as Theorems 2.1 and 2.6.
Theorem 2.1 introduces a non-empty bidirected and symplectically invariant
collection of Floer data, referred to as dissipative Floer data, for which
the honest Floer differential and continuation maps are well defined. After
introducing the notion of reduced cohomology, Theorem 2.6 then extends
the definition of Floer cohomology to the set Hs.c. of lower semi-continuous
time dependent exhaustion functions on M using continuity properties of
reduced Floer cohomology and an algebraic limiting procedure from [3].
Theorem 1.3.
(1)

(a) There is a natural isomorphism
∗

lim HF (H; K) = H ∗ (M ; K).
←−

H∈Hs.c

(b) There is a continuous norm-decreasing bilinear map
(2)

∗
∗
∗
ˆ
∗ : HF (H1 ; K)⊗HF
(H2 ; K) → HF (H1 + H2 ; K),

induced by the pair of pants product. It commutes with continuation maps and is associative and super-commutative. The unit of
H ∗ (M ; K) acts as a unit via the isomorphism (1).
The proof of Theorem 1.3 is carried out in §8.4. Essentially the same proof
can be used to construct operations associated with any family of nodal
Riemann surfaces and parametrized Floer data. Moreover, it is possible
to carry out a Lagrangian intersection variant of the results of this paper.
Thus, the TQFT structure presented for the case of Liouville domains in
[25] can be transferred in its entirety to the present setting.
In the rest of this introduction we will use Theorems 1.2 and 1.3 to
construct symplectic cohomology rings and discuss some of their functorial properties and applications. One of the main lessons is that there are
two different notions of symplectic cohomology associated with two different

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

5

topologies one can consider on the direct limit of a sequence of Banach chain
complexes. The locally convex topology gives rise to global invariants and
can be thought to correspond under mirror symmetry to the ring of algebraic
poly-vector fields. The Banach topology gives rise to local invariants and
corresponds under mirror symmetry to locally defined analytic poly-vector
fields. This distinction appears to have been masked to a large extent in
the literature so far due to the emphasis on Liouville domains with trivially
valued coefficient fields where various different invariants coincide. A similar
observation is made in a recent paper by S. Venkatesh[34].
1.2. Localized Floer theory. Let K ⊂ M be a compact set. Let
(
0,
x ∈ K,
HK (x) :=
∞, x ∈ M \ K.
The localized symplectic cohomology at K is defined by
∗

SH ∗ (M |K; K) := HF (HK ; K).
The following theorem lists the basic properties of SH ∗ (M |K; K) which can
be almost readily read off Theorems 1.2 and 1.3.
Theorem 1.4.
(a) The map K 7→ SH ∗ (M |K; K) is contravariantly
functorial with respect to inclusions.
(b) Any symplectomorphism ψ induces an isometry
ψ∗ : SH ∗ (M |K; K) → SH ∗ (M |ψ(K); K).
(c) SH ∗ (M |K; K) is a unital K-algebra with respect to ∗.
(d) We have a commutative triangle of K-algebras
H ∗ (M ; K)


SH ∗ (M |K2 ; K)

)
/ SH ∗ (M |K1 ; K)

(e) For any H ∈ H which is bounded on K we have a continuous map
and functorial map
∗

HF (H; K) → SH ∗ (M |K; K),
which increases the valuation1 by at most c = − supK H.
The proof of Theorem 1.4 appears at the end of §8.4
Remark 1.5. Suppose M is symplectically a-spherical and HK can be approximated by Hamiltonians whose periodic orbits have non-negative action.
1By definition, the valuation is val := log k · k.

6

YOEL GROMAN

Then the commutative triangle (35) can be refined to a commutative square
H ∗ (K2 ; K)

/ H ∗ (K1 ; K)




/ SH ∗ (M |K1 ; K).

SH ∗ (M |K2 ; K)

Combined with (4) below, this generalizes Viterbo’s commutative square for
Liouville domains[35].
Remark 1.6. We comment on the name localized symplectic cohomology.
First suppose the boundary of K is stable Hamiltonian. Then it can be
shown that elements of SH ∗ (M |K) are represented by linear combinations
of constant periodic orbits inside K and the Reeb orbits of ∂K. More
generally, these can be represented by, in addition to constants, periodic
orbits lying arbitrarily close to ∂K. For a particular manifestation of this,
see Theorem 1.7 below. Thus SH ∗ (M |K) can be thought of as symplectic
cohomology relative to the complement of K. That is, as localized at K.
Theorem 1.7. Let H be a smooth Hamiltonian such that H −1 (0) = ∂K.
(a) Suppose α is a non-trivial free homotopy class and let SH ∗,α (M |K; K)
denote the localized symplectic cohomology generated by periodic orbits in the class α. Suppose SH ∗,α (M |K; K) 6= 0. Then there is a
sequence an > 0 converging to 0 such that H −1 (an ) has a periodic
orbit representing α.
(b) Suppose c1 (M ) = 0. If SH ∗ (M |K; K) 6= H ∗ (K; K) then there is a
sequence an > 0 converging to 0 such that H −1 (an ) has a contractible
periodic orbit.
Theorem 1.7 is proven in §9.6. Some applications of local Floer cohomology to embedding and displaceability problems are given in §1.4 below.
We conclude with some comments on the relation of these groups with
similar work of others.
(a) When M is symplectically aspherical and K is the closure of an open
∗ (M |K) coincide with the corresponding symplectic
set U , the groups SH[a,b)
cohomology groups of U as defined in [5] using Hamiltonians which are
constant at infinity.
(b) In [34] the notion of completed symplectic cohomology is introduced
and studied for Liouville cobordisms W inside monotone symplectic manifolds. The computations in [34] show that the local symplectic cohomology
groups depend non trivially on K. The choice of Floer data in [34] is such
that the Floer chain complexes have finite boundary depth. In particular
ordinary and reduced Floer cohomology coincide for these Floer data. A
consequence of Theorem 2.6 is that the invariant of [34] is the local Floer
cohomology as defined here.
(c) In his as yet unpublished thesis, U. Varolgunes studies an invariant
which coincides with local symplectic cohomology as defined here on the

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

7

common domain of definition. He proves numerous results, in particular for
the case of invariant sets in integrable systems.
1.3. Symplectic cohomology. In this subsection we work exclusively with
ΛR coefficients. We do this to avoid working over trivially valued fields for
which some basic theorems in non-Archimedean analysis fail to hold.
Definition 1.8. Let H0 ⊂ Hs.c. be a semigroup with respect to pointwise
addition. The symplectic cohomology ring SH ∗ (M ; H0 , ΛR ) is defined by
∗

SH ∗ (M ; H0 , ΛR ) := lim HF (H; ΛR ),
−→
H∈H0
∗
SH (M ; H0 )

with the product induced by ∗.
is a non-Archimedean locally
d ∗ (M ; H0 ) its
convex topological vector space over ΛR . We denote by SH
Hausdorff completion. For a more detailed discussion, see §8.5.
Denote by H ⊂ Hs.c. the set of continuous time dependent exhaustions.
For any geometrically bounded symplectic manifold we obtain a symplectic
invariant.
Definition 1.9. The universal symplectic cohomology is defined by
d ∗univ (M ) := SH
d ∗ (M ; H).
SH
Remark 1.10. As discussed in Remark 8.18, there is generally no guarantee
d univ is well behaved as a topological vector space. Namely, it may be
that SH
non-metrizable. Better behaved topological vector spaces are obtained when
one considers semi-groups H0 with appropriate restrictions on the growth
at infinity. Such semi-groups play a role in numerous settings considered
in the literature [35, 21, 24]. In forthcoming papers this will be discussed
in relation to SYZ mirror symmetry on open manifolds and to magnetic
cotangent bundles.
∗

d
We list some applications of SH
univ (M ).
Let (M, ω) be a compact symplectic manifold and let ψ : M → M be
a symplectomorphism. Denote by M̃ψ the associated symplectic mapping
torus. See §9.2 for the definition. Denote by HF ∗ (M, ψ) the fixed point
Floer homology of ψ as introduced in [9]. The following theorem allows to
distinguish mapping tori by fixed point Floer homology.
∗

∗
k
d
ˆ
Theorem 1.11 (Cf. [10]). We have SH
univ (M̃ψ ) ' ⊕k∈Z HF (M, ψ ).
Here the right hand side is the completion with respect to the sup norm
and ' denotes isomorphism of the underlying topological vector space. In
particular, let ψi : M → M be a symplectomorphism for i = 0, 1. Suppose
there exists a symplectomorphism

φ : M̃ψ1 → M̃ψ2 .
Then φ induces an isomorphism HF ∗ (M, ψ1 ) = HF ∗ (M, ψ2 ).
Theorem 1.11 is proven in §9.2.

8

YOEL GROMAN

Theorem 1.12 (Kunneth formula). Let M1 and M2 be tame symplectic
manifolds. Then
(3)

d ∗univ (M2 ).
d ∗univ (M1 × M2 ) = SH
d ∗univ (M1 )⊗
ˆ  SH
SH

Here the tensor product is the injective tensor product in the category of
complete locally convex non-Archimedean topological vector spaces.
Theorem 1.12 is proven in §9.4.
Theorem 1.13 (Nearby existence ).
(a) Suppose that c1 (M ) = 0 and
∗
d
SH univ (M ) = 0. Then for any Hamiltonian H : M → R which is
proper and bounded from below, the subset of levels containing a contractible periodic orbit is dense in H(M ) ⊂ R.
d ∗,α (M ) 6= {0}. Then there is a
(b) Let α 6= 1 ∈ π1 (M ). Suppose SH
compact K ⊂ M such that for any smooth proper and bounded below
H : M → R and any a ∈ R for which H(K) ⊂ (−∞, a] the set of
x ∈ [a, ∞) for which H −1 (x) has a periodic orbit representing α is
dense in [a, ∞).
Theorem 1.13 is proven in §9.6.
Remark 1.14. Examples satisfying the hypotheses of the first part of Theorem 1.13 are complete toric varieties M such that c1 (M ) = 0. This follows
from the vanishing criterion of Theorem 9.10. See Example 9.13. There are
manifolds in this class of examples which unlike C contain non-displaceable
sets. Examples are the canonical bundles over P2 and over P1 × P1 . By the
Kunneth formula, the product of such a manifold with any geometrically
bounded symplectic manifold of vanishing Chern class will again satisfy the
hypothesis.
An example of an M and α satisfying the hypotheses the second part of
Theorem 1.13 is given by the cotangent bundle of the torus and any nontrivial homotopy class α. This can be deduced from Theorems 1.11 and
1.12. From this we obtain many examples by taking the product with an
arbitrary compact manifold or with a geometrically bounded one for which
symplectic cohomology does not vanish, and considering homotopy classes
pulled from the cotangent factor.
We can also use the methods of this paper to produce periodic orbits
with prescribed action. Namely, for a dissipative Hamiltonian H call a class
∗
d ∗univ (M ). Supa ∈ HF (H) essential if it maps to a non-zero class in SH
pose M is symplectically a-spherical. If H1 ≤ H2 are dissipative then for
any essential class a in HF ∗ (H1 ) there is a periodic orbit of H2 in the
same homotopy class with action bounded by val(a). Indeed, the map
d ∗ (M ) factors through HF ∗ (H2 ) by the continuation map
HF ∗ (H1 ) → SH
univ
which is action decreasing.
Example 1.15. On a Liouville domain, for any function H which is convex
at infinity, all non-zero classes in HF ∗ (H) are essential. This follows from

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

9

Theorem 1.16 below. The same holds for the product of a Liouville domain
with a compact a spherical manifold. These claims require working over R
instead of over ΛR , but this is not problematic in this restricted setting since
the action spectrum is bounded below and so the topology is discrete.
1.4. Liouville domains and displaceability. Let M be the completion of
a Liouville domain U . Denote by SHV∗ iterbo (U ; K) the symplectic cohomology as defined in [35] by taking a limit over all (H, J) where H is linear at
infinity and J is of contact type. See §9.1 for notation and definitions. Denote by L ⊂ H the directed set of Hamiltonians which are linear at infinity.
We have
SHV∗ iterbo (U ; K) = SH ∗ (M ; L, K),
and therefore a natural map
d ∗ (M ; K).
f : SHV∗ iterbo (U ; K) → SH
univ
We prove in Theorem 9.2 below
Theorem 1.16. The map f is an isomorphism over ΛR,ω = R coefficients.
Corollary 1.17. For a Liouville manifold M of finite type, SHV∗ iterbo (M ; R)
is independent of the choice of primitive of the symplectic form.
Remark 1.18. Theorem 1.16 can generally not be expected to be true over a
non-trivially valued field. See Remark 9.3 for an explanation on this point.
It is also not hard to show that for any Liouville sub-domain V ⊂ M we
have a natural isomorphism of vector spaces
(4)

SH ∗ (M |V ; R) = SHV∗ iterbo (V ; R).

Note however that the left hand side of (4) is naturally a normed vector
space while the right hand side is not. The equation will thus cease to
be true over a non-trivially valued field. The generalization of (4) for the
non-trivially valued case is the following excision principle
(5)

SH ∗ (M |V ; ΛR ) = SH ∗ (V̂ |V ; ΛR )

whenever M is a Liouville manifold and V is a Liouville subdomain with
V̂ its completion. This follows by the no escape Lemma near the concave
boundary of M \V . See [25]. We now formulate a theorem showing that this
independence of the ambient manifold holds under more general conditions
for skeleta of Liouville domains. In the following, we denote by SH ∗,0 (M |V )
the subgroup consisting of periodic orbits that are contractible in M . The
proofs of the following Theorems are given in §9.1.
Theorem 1.19. Let M be symplectically a-spherical and let U be a Liouville domain. Let i : U → M be an embedding with the property that
i∗ H1 (U ; R) → H1 (M ; R) is injective. Then
SH ∗,0 (M | Skel(U ); K) = SH ∗,0 (U | Skel(U ); K).

10

YOEL GROMAN

Remark 1.20. The restriction to contractible periodic orbits in Theorem
1.19 can be removed by adding the assumption that M is symplectically
a-toroidal.
Theorem 1.19 implies
Theorem 1.21. Let U and M be as in Theorem 1.19 and suppose
(6)

SHV∗ iterbo (U ) 6= 0.

Then Skel(U ) is not displaceable. In particular, no simply connected Liouville domain satisfying (6) can be embedded in the product C × M where M
is symplectically a-spherical and geometrically bounded.
Taking U the cotangent disc bundle, this is a well known theorem by Gromov. Namely, Cn contains no simply connected Lagrangians. The particular
case M = Û , the completion of U , is a theorem by [15]. We remark that
Theorem 1.21 follows from Theorem 1.19 by a general vanishing principle for
the localized Floer cohomology of a displaceable set. We prove this for M
aspherical. In a forthcoming work by U. Varolgunes this is proven without
the asphericity assumption. Note however that the asphericity assumption
in the last two theorems cannot be removed. Indeed, the anti-diagonal in
CP n × CP n is simply connected and displaceable. However, there are quantitative counterparts which should hold assuming essentially only tameness.
Theorem 1.22. Let M be semipositive and let U ,→ M be a Liouville
domain. Then there is a δ > 0 for which SHV∗,0iterbo (U ; R) embeds into
∗,0
SH[0,δ)
(M | Skel(U ); K) with valuation 0 as an R-subspace.
Theorem 1.23. Let M be aspherical and let U ,→ M be a Liouville domain
satisfying SHV∗ iterbo (U ) 6= 0. Then Skel(U ) has positive displacement energy.
Remark 1.24. It should not be hard to remove the asphericity assumption.
Once this is done and taking U to be the cotangent disk bundle we recover
a classical theorem by Chekanov [4] stating that Lagrangian submanifolds
have positive displacement energy.
1.5. Organization of the paper. The paper is organized as follows. §2
formulates Theorems 2.1 and 2.6 which constitute a more formal and detailed
statement of Theorem 1.2. Section §3 provides an overview of the techniques
going into the proof of Theorem 2.1. Sections §4 through §6 are devoted to
constructing Floer data with appropriate compactness properties required
for the proof of Theorem 2.1. The latter is carried out in §7. In §8 we prove
Theorems 2.6 and 1.3 and discuss topological aspects of the direct limit in
the definition of symplectic cohomology. In §9 we carry out the proofs of
the properties and applications mentioned in the introduction.
1.6. Acknowledgements. This work subsumes part of the author’s PhD
thesis carried out in the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. The author is

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

11

grateful to the Azrieli foundation for granting him an Azrieli fellowship at
that time.
Various stages of the work were carried out at the math departments of
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, the ETH of Zurich, and Columbia University. They were supported by the ERC Starting Grant 337560, ISF Grant
1747/13, Swiss National Science Foundation (grant number 200021 156000)
and the Simons Foundation/SFARI (#385571,M.A.).
The author would like to thank his thesis advisor Jake P. Solomon for his
guidance throughout his graduate work and for a great number of discussions and suggestions. The author is grateful to Mohammed Abouzaid for
suggesting some key ideas and to Paul Biran, Lev Buhovski, Sheel Ganatra,
Alex Oancea, Dietmar Salamon, Ran Tessler, Amitai Zernik, Umut Varolgunes and Sara Venkatesh, for useful input and enlightening discussions.
2. The main results: a detailed statement
For a symplectic manifold (M, ω), denote by J (M, ω) the set of ω-compatible
almost complex structures on M . Let
F ⊂ C ∞ (S 1 × M ) × C ∞ (S 1 , J (M, ω))
denote the set of Floer data (H, J) such that H is proper and bounded from
below, the Hamiltonian flow of H is defined for all time, and the metric
gJt := ω(·, Jt ·) is complete for any t ∈ S 1 . The set F is partially ordered by
the relation
(H0 , J0 ) ≤ (H1 , J1 ) ⇐⇒ H0 (x) ≤ H1 (x), ∀x ∈ M.
Theorem 2.1. There exists a bi-directed system Fd ⊂ F of Floer data which
satisfies the following:
(a) Fd is open in C 1 × C 0 with respect to the uniform norm induced in
a neighborhood of (H, J) by the metric gJ .
(b) Fd is symplectically invariant under the action
ψ · (H, J) 7→ (H ◦ ψ, ψ ∗ J),
for ψ any symplectomorphism.
(c) For each geometrically bounded almost complex structure J, Fd contains all pairs (H, J) such that H is Lipschitz with sufficiently small
Lipschitz constant with respect to gJ .
(d) A generic (H, J) ∈ Fd gives rise to a well defined Floer chain complex CF ∗ (H, J; K) generated over R by a Novikov covering of the
periodic orbits of H and whose differential is defined by counting
connecting Floer trajectories.
(e) With any pair F1 = (H1 , J1 ) ≤ F2 = (H2 , J2 ) there is associated
in a symplectically equivariant manner a contractible open set of
monotone homotopies Fd (F1 , F2 ) which satisfies the following. A

12

YOEL GROMAN

generic element H ∈ Fd (F1 , F2 ) gives rise to a well defined chain
map
CF ∗ (H1 , J1 ) → CF ∗ (H2 , J2 ).
The induced map on homology is independent of the choice of H and
is functorial with respect to ≤.
Theorem 2.1 is proven at the end of §7.3 after a fuller chain level statement
is given.
We will refer to the elements of Fd as dissipative Floer data. We will
denote by Hd ⊂ C ∞ (S 1 × M ) the projection of Fd on the first factor and refer to the elements of Hd as dissipative Hamiltonians. In the next section,
we give a detailed overview of the techniques used to define the directed
system Fd . The construction of Fd spans Sections 4 through 6. We discuss
a number of naturally occurring examples of dissipative Floer data throughout the paper, but in general verifying this for a given Floer datum may
be non-trivial. Theorem 2.6 which is the second of the two main theorems
of this paper serves to a large degree to overcome this difficulty. Namely
we will show how to extend the definition of Floer chain complexes to arbitrary exhaustion Hamiltonians in a way that allows putting the detailed
constructions of Theorem 2.1 into a black box for most theoretical purposes.
We emphasize though that the question of whether a given Hamiltonian is
dissipative remains important in many instances when studying specific examples.
Before proceeding we make a few comments.
(a) The Hamiltonians for which Floer cohomology is well defined according to Theorem 2.1 are proper. In particular, they are not compactly supported. To the authors’ knowledge, geometric boundedness has been used
so far, e.g, in [5], only for compactly supported Hamiltonians. The condition
on the support requires one to work on symplectically a-spherical manifolds
and use the action filtration to avoid the highly degenerate constant periodic
orbits. Theorem 2.1 has no such limitations. Moreover, from the point of
view of both mirror symmetry and dynamics, it is often important to work
with Hamiltonians of sufficiently fast growth at infinity. Floer cohomology
for certain types of proper Hamiltonians has hitherto been defined mostly
in the setting of manifolds whose end is modeled on the positive half of
the symplectization of a contact manifold [35, 24]2. But there are many
interesting settings where one does not have recourse to such a structure
at infinity. Among these are SYZ mirror symmetry and twisted cotangent
bundles, both settings to be investigated in forthcoming papers.
(b) Part (e) of Theorem 2.1 is one of the main contributions of this paper. It employs the notion of intermittent-boundedness introduced in Definition 4.1 below and the method of zig-zag homotopies in the proof of
Theorem 4.6 to circumvent the difficult question of the connectedness of
2We point out the notable exception of [1] which uses a method tailored to the specific

case of the cotangent bundle.

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

13

the space of geometrically bounded ω-tame almost complex structures on a
given symplectic manifold (M, ω). See remark 4.3. This method is used also
in Theorem 4.14 below to show that in numerous contexts where invariants
on open manifolds are defined using geometrically bounded almost complex
structures J, the resulting invariants do not depend on the choice of such a
J.
2.1. Reduced Floer cohomology. To state our next result we need to
introduce the notion of reduced cohomology familiar from Riemannian geometry in the context of Lp -cohomology. Namely, the complexes CF ∗ (H, J)
can be considered as non-Archimedean Banach spaces over ΛR with norm
given by k · k := eval(·) . On an open manifold, CF ∗ (H, J) will typically not
be finitely generated over the Novikov ring. This means that the differential
can generally not be expected to be a closed operator.
Definition 2.2. Let (C ∗ , d) be a topological complex. The reduced cohomology of C ∗ is
∗

\
H (C ∗ , d) := ker
d∗ /im d∗−1 ,
with the hat denoting completion and the over-line denoting the closure
inside the completion. For a dissipative H, we denote the reduced Floer
∗
cohomology by HF (H)3.
Remark 2.3. The Floer complexes as usually considered are complete. We
will however be working with complexes which require a completion. When
the Floer complex is finitely generated over a field, the differential is closed,
so reduced Floer cohomology coincides with ordinary Floer cohomology. The
same is true whenever the Floer complex has finite boundary depth. For
Liouville domains, the Floer differential for a strictly convex Hamiltonian is
closed if one is working over R, but not necessarily when working over ΛR .
Denote by (Hd , ≤) the category whose objects are dissipative Hamiltonians and where there is one morphism precisely when H1 ≤ H2 . Floer
cohomology as well as its reduced version are functors from this category
∗
to topological vector spaces. We now wish to show that the functor HF
naturally extends to a functor from the category (Hs.c. , ≤) of all lower semicontinuous extended exhaustion functions on S 1 × M . By this we mean
proper lower semi-continuous functions to the extended real line which are
bounded from below.
To properly state the claim we must include in the discussion the groups
∗ (H). Namely, the cohomology of the complex generated by elements
HF[a,b)
of CF ∗ (H) with action in the window [a, b). Note that we consider our chain
complexes to be generated by an appropriate Novikov covering of the space
of periodic orbits on which the action functional is single valued. While the
3We suppress J in the notation since the homology is independent of J as a consequence

of part (e) of Theorem 2.1.

14

YOEL GROMAN

∗ (H) may appear unnatural to consider as invariants outside
groups HF[a,b)
of the symplectically a-spherical case, they play an important role in the
analysis even in the non-a-spherical case.
Denote by I the set of intervals which are either of the form [a, b) ⊂ R
for −∞ < a < b ≤ ∞ or of the form (−∞, b). The set H × I is ordered by
the relation

(H1 , [a1 , b1 )) ≤ (H2 , ([a2 , b2 )) ⇐⇒ H1 ≤ H2

& a1 ≤ a2

& b1 ≤ b2 .

∗

Henceforth, we consider the functor HF from (Hd × I, ≤) to topological vector spaces. Note that when a > −∞, the topology is discrete and
∗
∗ .
HF [a,b) = HF[a,b)
Definition 2.4. Let (Ci∗ , d) for i = 1, 2 be complexes filtered by a valuation
with respect to which they are complete. We say that a valuation decreasing
chain map f : C1∗ → C2∗ is a filtered quasi-isomorphism if it induces a an
∗
isomorphism on filtered homologies H[a,b)
for a > −∞. We say that f is a
reduced quasi-isomorphism if f induces an isomorphism on the reduced
cohomology. We say that (C1∗ , d) is filtered (reduced) quasi-isomorphic to
(C2∗ , d) if there is a zig-zag of filtered (reduced) quasi-isomorphisms starting
at one and ending at the other.
Remark 2.5. As a consequence of Theorem 8.4 below, filtered quasi-isomorphism
is a stronger than reduced quasi-isomorphism.
∗

Theorem 2.6. There is a unique extension of the functor HF from the
category (Hd × I, ≤) to the category (Hs.c × I, ≤) which can be lifted the
chain level and which is continuous with respect to monotone convergence in
the following sense. If Hn is a monotone sequence in H converging pointwise
H then for all intervals [a, b) for which −∞ < a < b ≤ ∞ we have
(7)

∗
∗
(Hi ) = HF[a,b)
(H).
lim HF[a,b)
−→
i

Moreover, the chain level lift well defined up to filtered quasi-isomorphism.
Theorem 2.6 is proven at the end of §8.3.
The following comments expand upon the meaning of Theorem 2.6.
(a) The continuity statement (7) does not hold for intervals of the form
(−∞, a). Otherwise, by approximating H by Hamiltonians growing suf∗
ficiently slowly at infinity we would have that HF coincides with ordinary cohomology, a statement which is demonstrably false. Continuity for
(−∞, b) does hold under uniform convergence.
(b) The extension to lower semi-continuous functions is of interest since
the indicator function of a closed set is lower semi-continuous. This has been
used in the discussion of local Floer cohomology.
(c) The construction at the chain level is carried out in Theorem 8.11
by approximating a given H by dissipative Hamiltonians and taking an
appropriate kind of chain level limit which takes the topology into account.

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

15

A particular instance of this construction has made its appearance recently
in [34] building on a construction from [3].
∗
(d) The chain level construction of HF contains the full machinery of
Floer theory. See Lemma 8.13. Namely, there are filtration decreasing
continuation maps associated with appropriate monotone homotopies as well
as chain homotopy operators associated to homotopies of homotopies4.
(e) Chain level constructions play a role in Hamiltonian Floer theory in
defining quantitative invariants such as boundary depth, barcodes and torsion coefficients[32, 33]. We apply the quantitative chain level theory in a
limited way in the proof of Theorem 1.23. To incorporate quantitative invariants more fully in our setting, it appears that some further machinery
needs to be developed to deal with the fact that our complexes are only
defined up to filtered quasi-isomorphism. Note that the chain level constructions are most important for the Lagrangian intersection setting. The
latter setting is not touched upon here, but can be treated in a very similar
way.
(f) The reader may wonder regarding our restriction to proper Hamiltonians which are bounded below. In fact, a dual theory may be developed
for Hamiltonians which are proper and bounded above. See [34] for related
constructions. Properness alone, however, is not generally sufficient for our
methods to apply.
(g) Theorem 2.6 allows one to adapt Floer theoretic constructions to the
geometry of the specific setting one is interested in without having to worry
about complicated compactness questions. For an example of this, see the
derivation of the Kunneth formula in Hamiltonian Floer homology in §9.3.
Two cautionary remarks are in order however.
(i) For there to be a relation between the reduced Floer homology and periodic orbits of the Hamiltonian we are investigating, we must at least rule
out divergence of the second type described in §3 below. Namely, we need
to establish loopwise dissipativity, or some related property. In the geometrically interesting settings the author is aware of this is straightforward, but
it would be interesting to have a better understanding of this property.
(ii) It is theoretically possible for there to exist Floer data (H, J) which
are not dissipative, but for which, due to some accident, all the Floer moduli
spaces are compact and, moreover, give rise to reduced Floer homologies dif∗
fering from HF (H, J) as stipulated by Theorem 2.6. This cannot happen
for (H, J) which satisfy the following robustness property enjoyed by dissipative Floer data. The set of Floer solutions intersecting a given compact
set K and having energy at most E does not change if the Floer datum is
changed outside of a sufficiently large ball around K. Note that the usual approach for obtaining compactness using maximum principles does not imply

4It is perhaps amusing to note that establishing this in our setting forces us to consider

chain homotopies between chain homotopies.

16

YOEL GROMAN

Figure 1. Two types of divergence
this property. Indeed, any change to a Floer datum satisfying a maximum
principle provides a potential loophole to circumvent it.
3. Diameter control of Floer trajectories: an overview
In the next couple of sections we wish to investigate the conditions under
which a Floer datum F ∈ F gives rise to Floer homology groups. What it
comes down to are conditions under which Gromov compactness holds. To
sketch an outline of what is to come, let us first discuss how compactness
might fail. Let un : R × S 1 be a sequence of solutions to Floer’s equation
(8)

∂s u + J(∂t u − XH ) = 0

satisfying for some positive number E and some compact set K ⊂ M ,
Z
1
k∂s uk2 ≤ E,
u(R × S 1 ) ∩ K 6= ∅.
E(u) :=
2
In general there are two ways in which such a sequence may diverge. First
there might be (after possibly reparametrizing) a fixed value s and a compact
set K 0 such that un (s, ·) intersects K 0 but the diameter of un (s, ·) is not
bounded uniformly in n. Second, there might be a sequence sn → ∞ such
that un (sn , ·) converges to infinity.
In the text below we introduce two conditions, one for ruling out each
divergence. For the first type of divergence we introduce the condition of
intermittent boundedness, or, i-boundedness. It involves bounds on the
geometry of an associated metric on the Hamiltonian mapping torus which
are required to hold on a sufficiently large subset of M . This condition
is introduced first for the case where H = 0 in §4 where we show that it
provides diameter control. The condition of i-boundedness is framed so as
to be contractible by allowing zig-zag homotopies. In §5 we discuss a trick
which allows us to obtain the same diameter control for H non-zero provided

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

17

we restrict attention to fixed compact sets of the domain. When H is nonzero, we are considering a geometry which is determined not just by J but
also by H. Most of §5 is devoted to studying the geometry of this metric.
To rule out the second type of divergence we introduce a number of variants of Palais-Smale type conditions. These properties are referred to collectively as loopwise dissipativity. These apply to the parametrized case if
the s-dependence is compactly supported. This condition is likely not contractible. But this is not a problem since it only needs to be satisfied on the
ends. In this it is similar to the non-degeneracy condition which is usually
require in Floer theory. Note that unlike the property of i-boundedness,
the property of loopwise dissipativity is not readily verifiable on non-exact
submanifolds for Hamiltonians that do not have a small Lipschitz constant.
In those cases it requires some understanding of the Hamiltonian flow.
Floer data satisfying these conditions are called dissipative.
We discuss three classes of examples of dissipative (H, J).
(a) H is Lipschitz with respect to gJ with sufficiently small Lipschitz
constant outside of a compact set. More generally, mainly to allow a
cofinal set, we require the Lipschitz condition only on a sufficiently
large subset of M . This class of examples is sufficient for all the
theoretical constructions of this paper.
(b) M is exact and the action functional satisfies the Palais-Smale condition. See §6.4.
(c) The Hamiltonian flow of H is sufficiently close to being invariant
with respect to a radial parameter. See §6.5.
The following sections §4 through §6 are devoted to the construction of dissipative Floer data. They are organized as follows. In §4 we introduce the
notion of i-boundedness, establish its contractibility and derive various versions of diameter estimate it implies. In §5 we introduce the Floer equation
and the Gromov metric. We introduce the notions of i-bounded and geometrically dissipative almost Floer data. Finally, we study the geometry of the
Gromov metric for translation invariant Floer data. In §6 we study various
aspects of the property of loopwise dissipativity and establish a diameter
estimate as well as some effective criteria.

4. I-bounded almost complex structures
For a Riemannian metric g on a manifold M and a point p ∈ M we denote
by injg (p) the radius of injectivity and by Secg (p) the maximal sectional
curvature at p. We drop g from the notation when it is clear from the
context.
Definition 4.1. Let (M, g) be a complete Riemannian manifold. For a > 0,
the metric g is said to be a-bounded at a point p ∈ M if inj(p) ≥ a1 and
| Sec(x)| ≤ a2 for all x ∈ B1/a (p).

18

YOEL GROMAN

We say that g is intermittently bounded, abbreviated i-bounded, if
there is an exhaustion K1 ⊂ K2 ⊂ . . . of M by precompact sets and a
sequence {ai }i≥1 of positive numbers such that the following holds.
1
(a) d(Ki , ∂Ki+1 ) > a1i + ai+1
.
(b) g is ai -bounded on ∂Ki .
(c)
∞
X
1
= ∞.
ai 2

(9)

i=1

The data {Ki , ai }i≥1 is called taming data for (M, g).
For a symplectic manifold (M, ω), an ω-compatible almost complex structure J is called i-bounded if there exists an i-bounded Riemannian metric
g with taming data {Ki , ai } and constants Ci such that
(a)
∞
X

(10)

i=1

1
= ∞.
(Ci ai )2



(b) gJ is Ci -quasi-isometric to g on B Ki , a1i . Namely,
1
kXkg ≤ kXkgJ ≤ Ci kXkg
Ci


on B Ki , a1i .
The symplectic form ω is said to be i-bounded if it admits an i-bounded
almost complex structure. For an i-bounded (M, ω) denote by Ji.b. (M, ω)
the space of i-bounded almost complex structures.
A k-parameter family (gt )t∈[0,1]k of i-bounded Riemannian metrics on M
is said to be uniformly i-bounded, or u.i.b., if there is an  > 0 such that
for each t0 ∈ [0, 1]k the taming data {Ki , ai } can be chosen fixed on the 
neighborhood of t0 . A family {Jt } of almost complex structures is called
u.i.b. if the corresponding family {gJt } of Riemannian metrics is uniformly
i-bounded.
Example 4.2. If J is geometrically bounded, meaning that gJ is a-bounded
everywhere for some a, it is i-bounded. In this case, we can take the taming
data to be {Ki = B3i/a (p), ai = a} for some arbitrary point p ∈ M .
Remark 4.3. The condition of i-boundedness is framed so that it simultaneously guarantees the conclusions of Theorems 4.6 and 4.10 below. Namely,
the condition is contractible, but still allows apriori control of the diameters
of J-holomorphic curves. If we were to require boundedness everywhere, not

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

19

just near ∂Ki , it appears unlikely to get a contractible condition as required
in invariance proofs5.
Remark 4.4. Theorem 4.6 below will remain true if we impose more stringent requirements on the numbers ai , say, that they be bounded by a given
constant. The reason we allow the numbers ai to diverge (subject to (10))
is that in the context of Floer theory some times there naturally arise almost complex structures with associated metrics that do not have uniformly
bounded sectional curvature. Example are the Sasaki metric on the cotangent bundle and the induced metric on the mapping torus of a quadratic
Hamiltonian on the completion of a Liouville domain.
Remark 4.5. Note that if J is i-bounded and J 0 is such that kJ − J 0 kgJ is
bounded, then J 0 is i-bounded.
Theorem 4.6. The space Ji.b. (M, ω) is connected. Moreover, any two elements can be connected by a u.i.b. family. Similarly, any two uniformly
tame k-parameter families can be connected by a u.i.b. k + 1-parameter
family.
Remark 4.7. The idea of the proof is very similar to the that of Proposition
11.22 in [6].
Proof. Let J0 , J1 ∈ Ji.b. . Given taming data {Kni , ain }n≥1 for Ji , i = 0, 1, let
(cin , din )n≥1 be sequences of positive integers constructed inductively such
that the following holds.
(a)
∀n.
K 0 d0n +c0n ⊂ Kd11n ,
K 1 d1n +c1n ⊂ Kd00 ,
n+1

(b)
din+cn −1 

X

k=din +1

1
aik

2
≥

1
,
n

i = 0, 1.

Write Vni := K i din +cin \ Kdi i for i = 0, 1. The sets Vni are all disjoint by (a).
n
Let {Js })s∈[0,1] be a smooth homotopy connecting J0 and J1 which is fixed
and equal to J1 on the subsets Vn0 for all s ∈ [0, 2/3] and to J1 on the subsets
Vn1 for all s ∈ [1/3, 1]. Let
Ai := ∪n [din + 1, din + cin − 1]
for i = 0, 1. By (a) and (b), the data
n
o
Kni i , aini
k

k

nk ∈Ai

,

i = 0, 1,

constitute taming data for Js on the intervals [0, 2/3] and [1/3, 1] respectively. Moreover, for each s ∈ [0, 1] the metric gJs is complete. Indeed, the
5As evidence for this consider that one can show using the result of [19] that the
space of complete Riemannian metrics inducing a given volume form and having bounded
geometry is disconnected. In fact, it has infinitely many connected components.

20

YOEL GROMAN

distance of ∂Kni k from any fixed point goes to ∞ for i = 0 and s ∈ [0, 2/3],
and for i = 1 and s ∈ [1/3, 1]. We have thus connected J0 and J1 in
a uniformly tame way. We now generalize to the k-parameter case. Let

Figure 2. A Zig-Zag homotopy from J0 (light) to J1 (dark).
{Ji,t }t∈[0,1]k for i = 0, 1 be two smooth k-parameter families. Let C be an
open cover of the cube [0, 1]k by open cubes of side length  for  so small
that the taming data for both families can be chosen fixed on each such
cube. For each c ∈ C and i ∈ {0, 1} we construct precompact open subsets
{Vni,c } in such a way that
(a) Vni11 ,c1 is disjoint from Vni22 ,c2 whenever (i1 , c1 , n1 ) 6= (i2 , c2 , n2 )
i,c
(b) There is taming data supported in ∪∞
n=1 Vn for {Ji,t }t∈c where we
say that the taming data {Ki , ai }i≥1 is supported in an open set
V ⊂ M if V contains all the balls B1/ai (∂Ki ).
Such sets can be constructed inductively along the same lines as in the
0-parameter case. We can then take any smooth homotopy
{Js,t }(s,t)∈[0,1]×[0,1]k
which is fixed on all the subsets {Vn0,c } for s ∈ [0, 2/3] and on all the subsets
{Vn1,c } for s ∈ [1/3, 1].

For a J holomorphic curve u : S → M denote by E(u; S) the energy
Z
u∗ ω
S

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

21

of u on S. We drop S from the notation when it is clear from the context.
The following theorem is taken from [29].
Theorem 4.8. [Monotonicity] Let gJ be a-bounded6 at p ∈ M . Let Σ
be a compact Riemann surface with boundary and let u : Σ → M be Jholomorphic such that p is in the image of u and such that
u(∂Σ) ∩ B1/a (p) = ∅.
Then there is a universal constant c such that

c
E u; u−1 (Ba (p)) ≥ 2 .
a
If gJ is quasi-isometric to an a-bounded metric with quasi-isometry constant
A, the same inequality holds but with c replaced by Ac2 .
Proof. This just a reformulation of the monotonicity inequality in [29]. See
Proposition 4.3.1(ii) and the comment right after Definition 4.1.1 there. For
completeness, we add a statement and proof of that comment in Lemma 4.9
as we didn’t find a proof of it in the literature.

Lemma 4.9. Let g be Riemannian metric which is a-bounded at p ∈ M .
Then any loop γ : S 1 → B1/a (p) bounds a disk of area less than 21 `2 (γ).
Our proof is taken from [18], the only addition being the precise dependence on the curvature.
Proof. Let γ̃ : S 1 → Tp M be the unique path such that expp γ̃(θ) = γ(θ).
Consider the disk u(r, θ) = expp rγ̃(θ). Since the geodesics emanating from
p minimize distance within B1/a (p), we have
1
k∂r uk = kγ̃(θ)k = d(γ(0), γ(θ)) ≤ `(γ).
2
We need to estimate the Jacobi field J(r, θ) := ∂θ u(r, θ). For this we use the
strong version of Rauch comparison theorem from [16]. Namely, we have
that the function
kJ(r, θ)k
.
sin ar
is monotone nondecreasing on the interval [0, πa ]. So,
kJ(r, θ)k ≤ kγ 0 (θ)k.
Thus,
Z

2π

Z

Area(u) ≤
0

0

1

1
1
kγ 0 (θ)k `(γ)drdθ = `2 (γ).
2
2


The following theorem is fundamental for all that follows. It gives a priori
control over the diameter of a J holomorphic curve u : Σ → M with free
boundary in terms of its energy.
6As the proof shows, we only need an estimate from above on the sectional curvature.

The stronger requirement is needed later in §5.5.

22

YOEL GROMAN

Theorem 4.10. Let J ∈ Ji.b. .
(a) For any compact set K ⊂ M and E ∈ R+ there exists an R > 0 such
that for any connected compact Riemann surface Σ with boundary
and any J-holomorphic map
u : (Σ, ∂Σ) → (M, K)
satisfying E(u; Σ) ≤ E, we have u(Σ) ⊂ BR (K).
(b) Let Σ be a connected compact Riemann surface with boundary. For
any compact set K ⊂ M , any compact subset S of the interior of Σ
and any E ∈ R+ , there exists an R such that for any J-holomorphic
map
u:Σ→M
satisfying E(u; Σ) ≤ E and u(S) ∩ K 6= ∅ we have u(S) ⊂ BR (K).
In both cases, besides the dependence on E and on S, R depends only on
taming data of J inside BR (K). That is, given J 0 which has the same taming
data as J on BR (K), the claim will hold with the same R for J 0 -holomorphic
curves with energy at most E.
Remark 4.11. The reader should be careful to note that in case (b) where
there is no control over the image of the boundary, to control the diameter
of u(S) we need control of the energy in the larger surface Σ.
Remark 4.12. A remark is in order concerning the dependence of R on the
geometry in case (b). In addition to the dependence on the taming data and
on E, R depends on the distance d(S, ∂Σ) with respect to any conformal
metric of a priori bounded curvature.
Proof. Let {Ki , ai } be taming data for J. Let N ∈ Z be such that K ⊂ KN .
Let i0 > 0 and xi0 ∈ Σ be such that u(xi0 ) ∈ ∂Ki0 +N . If no such i0 and
xi0 exist we take R = d(K, KN +1 ) and we are done. Otherwise, there is a
sequence xi ∈ Σ such that u(xi ) ∈ ∂KN +i for 0 < i ≤ i0 . In case (a) we
argue as follows. For each 1 ≤ i ≤ i0 , we have b1/aN +i (u(xi )) ∩ u(∂Σ) = ∅.
Also,
1
1
+
,
d(u(xi ), u(xj )) >
aN +i aN +j
whenever i 6= j. By the monotonicity inequality we obtain
E(u; Σ) ≥

i0
X

i0
 X
C
E u; u−1 (b1/aN +i (u(xi )) ≥
.
2
a
i+N
i=1
i=1

By (10) this implies an a priori upper bound on i0 . Let i0 be the largest
possible such. The claim then holds with R = d(K, KN +i0 +1 ).
In case (b) we argue as follows. Pick an area form ωΣ on Σ which together
with jΣ determines a Rmetric whose sectional curvature is bounded in absolute
value by 1. Let A = Σ ωΣ and let  := d(S, ∂Σ). Let
ũ = id × u : Σ → Σ × M,

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

23

and let J˜ be the product almost complex structure on Σ × M . Then ũ is
J-holomorphic and E(ũ) = E(u) + A. For any x ∈ Σ, any p ∈ M and
any a ≥ 1 such that (M, gJ ) is a-bounded at p we have that (Σ × M, gJ˜)
is a-bounded at (x, p).nMoreover,
o defining xi as before for points xi ∈ S,
1
the ball of radius min ai+N ,  around ũ(xi ) = (xi , u(xi )) does not meet
ũ(∂Σ). Thus, arguing as before, we have
(
)
i0
X
1
E(u; Σ) + A = E(ũ; Σ) ≥
C min
, 2 .
2
a
i+N
i=1
The claim follows as before.

The final ingredient we shall need is the following elementary observation
whose proof we leave for the reader.
Theorem 4.13. The pullback of a u.i.b. family by a uniformly continuous
map is u.i.b.
Theorem 4.6 has consequences for symplectic invariants on open manifolds
which we state as the following theorem.
Theorem 4.14. The following invariants whose definition requires fixing
geometrically bounded almost complex structure J are independent of the
choice of such J.
(a) The Gromov-Witten theory on geometrically bounded manifolds studied in [17].
(b) Symplectic homology of relatively compact open sets studied in [8]7.
(c) Rabinowitz Floer homology of tame stable Hamiltonian hypersurfaces
in geometrically bounded manifolds [7]8.
Proof. By Theorem 4.6 we can connect any two such almost complex structures J0 and J1 via a path Js of i-bounded almost complex structures. By
Theorem 4.10 below the Js -holomorphic curves of energy ≤ E with boundary in a given compact set K are contained in a compact set K 0 (E, K).
Thus, standard cobordism or continuation arguments can be applied.

Remark 4.15. The question of what kind of deformation of the symplectic
structure preserves which of these invariants appears to be more subtle and
is not studied here. In a forthcoming work, the question is taken up for
particular type of deformation on Liouville domains.
Remark 4.16. It is not known to the author whether the class of i-bounded
symplectic manifolds is strictly larger than the class of geometrically bounded
symplectic manifolds. It appears likely that it might be easier to characterize the class of i-bounded symplectic manifolds in terms of the topology
7See Remark 3.3 in [8] where this question is raised.
8See the beginning of §4.5 in [7].

24

YOEL GROMAN

of ω. Call a symplectic manifold complete if for any disconnecting compact
hypersurfaces Σ, a component of M \ Σ which has finite volume is precompact in M . An interesting question is whether there are any obstructions to
weak boundedness on complete symplectic manifolds?
It is also an interesting question whether finiteness of the total volume is
an obstruction to weak boundedness, as it is to boundedness. In dimension
2 the answer is clearly positive, but in higher dimension this is not clear to
the author. If the answer is negative, it is possible that there are contact
manifolds whose symplectization admit i-bounded almost complex structures allowing to define Floer theoretic invariants on them without recourse
to symplectic field theory. This remark is due to A. Oancea.
5. Floer solutions and the Gromov metric
5.1. The Floer-Novikov covering and Floer’s equation. Let (M, ω) be
a symplectic manifold. Denote by LM the free loop space C ∞ (S 1 , M ). Let
Iω , Ic : π1 (LM ) → R be given by integrating ω and the Chern class respecg be the Abelian covering space
tively. Let the Floer-Novikov covering LM
g
g ) = π1 (LM ) is
of LM for which i∗ π1 (LM ) = ker Iω ∩ ker Ic where i∗ π1 (LM
g is constructed as follows. For
the natural inclusion. Explicitly, the space LM
]a consists of
each component LMa of LM choose a base loop γa . Then LM
equivalence classes of pairs (γ, A) such that γ ∈ LMa , A is a homotopy class
of paths in LMa starting with γa and ending at γ, and the equivalence relation is (γ, A1 ) ∼ (γ, A2 ) if and only if ω(A1 ) = ω(A2 ) and c1 (A1 ) = c1 (A2 ).
For a smooth function H : S 1 × M → R and for any t ∈ S 1 denote by XHt
the unique vector field satisfying dH(t, ·) = ω(XHt , ·). Fixing base loops on
g → R by
the components of LM , define a functional AH : LM
Z 2π
AH ([γ, A]) := −ω(A) −
H(γ(t))dt.
0

Denote by P(H) ⊂ LM the set of 1-periodic orbits of XH . Denoting by
g → LM,
π : LM
the covering map, let
^ = π −1 (P(H)).
P(H)
^ carries
This is the same as the critical point set of AH . Each γ̃ ∈ P(H)
an index irs (γ̃) which is well defined up to a global shift for each homotopy class of loops. Namely, for each homotopy class a fix a trivialization
of γa∗ T M . Then if γ̃ = (γ, A) trivialize γ ∗ T M along A by extending the
trivialization along γa and take the Robin-Solomon index of γ with respect
to this trivialization.
Given an S 1 parameterized family of almost complex structures Jt on M ,
the gradient of AH (γ) at γ is the vector field
∇AH (γ)(t) := Jt (γ̇(t) − XHt (γ(t)))

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

25

along γ. Note that the gradient field is independent of the choice of base
paths. A gradient trajectory is a path in (a covering of) loop space whose
tangent vector at each point is the negative gradient at that point. Explicitly
a gradient trajectory is a map
u : R × S 1 → M,
satisfying Floer’s equation
(11)

∂s u + Jt (∂t u − XHt ◦ u) = 0.

We refer to such solutions as Floer trajectories. A Floer trajectory is
nontrivial if there is a point such that ∂t u 6= XH .
More generally, let Σ be a finite type Riemann surface with cylindrical
ends. This means that Σ is obtained from a compact Riemann surface by a
finite number of punctures and that near each puncture we fix a conformal
coordinate system ψ : (a, b) × S 1 → Σ such that either (a, b) = (−∞, 0) or
(a, b) = (0, ∞). In the first case we call the puncture negative and in the
second, positive. Let H ∈ Ω1 (Σ, C ∞ (M )) be a 1-form with values in smooth
Hamiltonians such that near each puncture there is an H ∈ C ∞ (S 1 × M )
for which H = Hdt there. We denote by XH the corresponding 1-form with
values in Hamiltonian vector fields. Let J ∈ C ∞ (Σ, J (ω)) and suppose J is
s independent on the cylindrical ends. The datum (H, J) is called a domain
dependent Floer datum.
Let u : Σ → M be smooth. For a 1-form γ on Σ with values in u∗ T M
write
1
γ 0,1 := (γ + J ◦ γ ◦ jΣ ) .
2
A Floer solution on Σ is a map u : Σ → M satisfying Floer’s equation
(12)

(du − XH (u))0,1 = 0.

Note that Equation (11) is a special case. We refer to J and H as the Floer
data of u. The geometric energy of u on a subset S ⊂ Σ is defined as
Z
1
EH,J (u; S) :=
kdu − XH k2J dvolΣ .
2 S
We omit any one of H, J or S from the notation when they are clear from
the context. Floer’s equation reduces to the nonlinear Cauchy Riemann
equation when H(v) = γ ⊗ Const for γ a 1-form on Σ. In this case the two
definitions of the energy coincide. Namely, we have the identity
Z
Z
Z
1
1
2
2
(13)
kdu − XH k =
kduk =
u∗ ω.
2 S
2 S
S
5.2. The Gromov metric. Let u : Σ → M be a Floer solution for the
Floer data F = (H, J). Define JF by


jΣ (z)
0
JF (z, x) :=
.
XH (z, x) ◦ jΣ (z) − J(z, x) ◦ XH (z, x) J(x)

26

YOEL GROMAN

Let
ũ = (id, u) : Σ → Σ × M.
Then ũ is JF holomorphic. This construction is known as Gromov’s trick.
See, e.g., [18, Ch. 8.1]. Henceforth, given a Riemann surface Σ with cylindrical ends, we shall assume that it comes equipped with an area form which
is compatible with the complex structure and coincides with the standard one
ds ∧ dt on the ends. Note that JF is not generally tamed by the product
symplectic structure ωM̃ = ωΣ ×ωM . However, we have the following lemma.
Lemma 5.1. Suppose {H, H} = 0 .Namely, for any z ∈ Σ and any pair
v1 , v2 ∈ Tz Σ we have
{H(v1 ), H(v2 )} = 0

(14)

Assume that for each (z, x) ∈ Σ × M we have
dH(z, x)|Tz Σ ≥ 0.

(15)
Then the 2-form

ωH := ωΣ × ωM + dH,
is a symplectic form which is compatible with JF .
Proof. We only show that ωH is a symplectic form. Closedness is clear, so
we only need to show non-degeneracy. In local coordinates on Σ write
H = Hdt + Gds.
Then
dH = dH ∧ dt + dG ∧ ds + (∂s H − ∂t G)ds ∧ dt.
Suppose there is a vector v = (v1 , v2 ) ∈ Σ × M for which ιv ωH is the 0-form.
Then
−ιv2 ωM = dt(v1 )dH + ds(v1 )dG.
So, v2 = aXH + bXG for appropriate constants a, b ∈ R. Since {H, G} = 0
it follows that ιv2 (dH ∧ dt + dG ∧ ds) = 0. Thus,
ιv1 (ωΣ + (∂s H − ∂t G)ds ∧ dt) = 0.
Our assumption is that the coefficient of ds ∧ dt in nonnegative. It follows
that v1 = 0 which in turn implies v2 = 0.

Remark 5.2. More generally, if we replace the estimate (15) by
(16)

dH(z, x)|Tz Σ ≥ −ads ∧ dt,

for some constant a, we have that the form
ωH,a := ωH + ads ∧ dt,
is symplectic.
The Poisson bracket condition (14) may also be weakened to the requirement that for any point z ∈ σ and vectors v1 , v2 ∈ Tz Σ we have
(17)

|{H(v1 ), H(v2 )}(x)| < akv1 kkv2 k,

∀x ∈ M.

In that case, the form ωH,a will again be a symplectic form.

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

27

Lemma 5.3. Let Σ be a Riemann surface with cylindrical ends and let (H, J)
be a domain dependent Floer datum on Σ. For any (H, J)-Floer solution
u : Σ → M satisfying (15), we have
Z
ũ∗ ωH − ωΣ .
E(u; Σ) ≤
Σ

The expression on the right is called the topological energy and denoted by
E top (u).
Proof. Write in local coordinates H = Hdt + Gds. Then using the Floer
equation and denoting by d0 the exterior derivative in the M direction,
kdu − XH k2 ds ∧ dt = ω(∂t u − XH , XG − ∂s u)ds ∧ dt
= u∗ ω + (d0 H(∂s u) + d0 G(∂t u))ds ∧ dt
= u∗ ω + dH − (∂s H ◦ u − ∂t G ◦ u))ds ∧ dt
≤ u∗ ω + dH.

Henceforth, we shall denote by gJF the Riemannian metric determined by
ωH and JF and refer to it as the Gromov metric. When H = Hdt we will
also use the notation JH and gJH .
Example 5.4. Let H = Hdt, where H : M → R is smooth. Then one finds
by a straightforward computation that
gJH = π1∗ gj + π2∗ gJ + gmixed ,
where πi are the natural projections and
gmixed = −gJ (XH , ·)dt + kXH k2 dt2 .
Definition 5.5. Let Σ be a Riemann surface with cylindrical ends. A
domain dependent Floer datum (H, J) on Σ is called i-bounded if
(a) H satisfies inequalities (14) and (15) (or, more generally, inequalities (17) and (16)).
(b) There exists a finite open cover C of Σ such that for each U ∈ C we
have JH |U ×M ∈ Ji.b. (ωH ) (or, more generally, JH ∈ Ji.b. (ωH,a )).
Definition 5.6. Let S be a manifold with corners. A compact family Σ{s∈S}
of (broken) Riemann surfaces with cylindrical ends together with a smooth
choice domain dependent i-bounded Floer data (Hs , Js ) is called admissible
if the following holds. Denote by π : S → S the tautological bundle. Then
there is a finite cover of S by connected opens consisting of elements of two
types: T hickS and T hinS . The elements of T hickS are subsets of S of the
form U = V × W where W ⊂ S and V is a bordered Riemann surface whose
area is bounded on W . The fibers of π restricted to elements of T hinS are
generically cylinders (of finite, half infinite or infinite length) which may
degenerate to nodes at the corners. Moreover, for the thin elements we
require that the Floer data be translation invariant on the fibers of π and

28

YOEL GROMAN

that the area forms to coincide with ds ∧ dt. We say that the family S is
uniformly i-bounded if for any thick element U = V × W there exist
taming data on V × M which are constant on W and for any thin element
U the there exist taming data on [−1, 1] × S 1 × M which are constant on
π(U ).
We wish to establish effective criteria for i-boundedness of JF . To do this
we need to a criterion for completeness of the metric gJF . Then we need
to discuss how to compute the curvature of gJF and control its radius of
injectivity in terms of the Floer data J and H. We do this in the case where
H = Hdt for a time independent Hamiltonian H as in Example 5.4. Since
intermittent boundedness is preserved under quasi-isometry, this should be
quite sufficient for applications insofar as Floer trajectories are concerned.
The consideration of more general Floer solutions will be reduced to that of
Floer trajectories.
5.3. Completeness.
Definition 5.7. Let J be an almost complex structure. We say that an
exhaustion function H : M → R is J-proper if H factors as H = f ◦ h for
some proper smooth function h : M → R which is 1-Lipschitz with respect
to the metric gJ on M .
Lemma 5.8. Let (H, J) be J-proper with H = f ◦ h and khk ≤ 1. For any
function g : [a, b] → R and any γ : [a, b] → M we have
Z b
2
|h(γ(b)) − h(γ(a))| ≤ (b − a)
kg(t)XH − γ 0 (t)k2 dt.
a

Proof. We have
2
Z b


|h(γ(b)) − h(γ(a))|2 =  h∇h, γ 0 (t)idt
a
Z b
2


0

=  h∇ht , γ (t) − g(t)XH idt
a

Z b
≤ (b − a)
kg(t)XH − γ 0 (t)k2 dt.
a

We used Cauchy-Schwartz, k∇hk ≤ 1, and the fact that XH ⊥ ∇h.



Lemma 5.9. Suppose (H, J) is J-proper. Then M̃ carries a proper function
which is Lipschitz with respect to gJH . In particular, the metric gJH is
complete.
Proof. Let H = f ◦ h where h is proper and Lipschitz with respect to the
product metric. We show that it is Lipschitz with respect to gJH . It suffices
to show that for any path γ̃ : [a, b] → M̃ lifting a path γ : [a, b] → M we
have
Z
2
|h(γ̃(b)) − h(γ̃(a))| ≤ (b − a) kγ̃ 0 k2gJ .
H

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

29

For each s we can gHJ -orthogonally decompose
γ̃ 0 (s) = v(s) + g(s)(XH + ∂t ),
where v(s) ∈ T M . We have
kγ̃ 0 (s)k2gH ≥ kv(s)k2 = kγ 0 (s) − g(s)XH k2gJ .
J

The claim follows by Lemma 5.8.
To see that gJH is complete observe that for any x we have that the ball
of radius R around x in M̃ is contained in the compact subset
h−1 ([h(x) − R, h(x) + R]).

We conclude with a criterion for J-properness. Call a function f : R →
[1, ∞) tame if the primitive of f1 is unbounded from above.
Lemma 5.10. Suppose there is a tame function such that
k∇HkgJ ≤ f (H).
Then H is J-proper.
Proof. Let g be a primitive of

1
f.

We have

k∇(g ◦ H)k = g 0 ◦ Hk∇Hk =

1
k∇Hk ≤ 1.
f ◦H

By assumption h := g ◦ H is proper. Moreover, g is monotone (primitive of
a positive function). So H = g −1 ◦ h.

5.4. Curvature. We introduce some notation and recall some basic formulae in Riemannian geometry. We refer to [23] for details. Let (M, g) be a
Riemannian manifold and let r : M → R be a distance function. This means
that k∇rk = 1. Write ∂r := ∇r and denote by S the tensor ∇∂r . Denote
by Ur the level sets of r. Denote by R the curvature tensor of M , by Rt
the tangential component of R restricted to T Ur and by Rr the curvature
tensor of Ur . Also, write R∂r = R(·, ∂r )∂r .
The following formulae, together with the symmetries of the curvature
tensor, show that the full curvature tensor on M is determined by the curvature of the level sets of r, by the tensor S and by its first derivative.
(18)

− R∂r = S 2 + ∇∂r S,

(19)

Rt (X, Y )Z = Rr (X, Y )Z − S(X) ∧ S(Y )Z,

(20)

R(X, Y )∂r = (∇X S)(Y ) − (∇Y S)(X).

The vectors X, Y and Z in the above formulae are all tangent to Ur . In the
sequel, given a vector V ∈ T M we will use the notation θg,V for the dual
to V with respect to g and will drop g from the notation when there is no

30

YOEL GROMAN

ambiguity. We utilize the following formula for the covariant derivative of a
vector field X
2θg,∇X = dθg,X + LX g.

(21)

This formula presents the decomposition of θg,∇X into a symmetric and an
anti-symmetric bilinear form. For a proof see [23].
Let H = Hdt, where H : M → R is smooth. Since gJF is translation
invariant with respect to s, we restrict attention to sub-manifolds of R ×
S 1 × M with fixed values of s, or, in other words, to S 1 × M with the
metric gJF as computed in Example 5.4. The function t (which is locally
single valued) is a distance function on S 1 × M with respect to this metric.
∂
Moreover, we have that ∇t = XH + ∂t
.
∗ ) ◦ π where the superTheorem 5.11. We have ∇∇t = 21 (∇gJ XH + ∇gJ XH
script denotes conjugation with respect to the metric gJ and π : T (S 1 ×M ) →
T M is the gJH orthogonal projection.

Proof. Write N = ∇t. By equation (21) we have
2θ∇N = dθN + LN gJF .
Since θN = dt, we have dθN = 0. We claim that LN gJF = π ∗ LXH gJ . To see
this denote by ψt the time t flow of XH and let
φ : (−, ) × M ⊂ S 1 × M → S 1 × M,
be the map (t, p) 7→ (t, ψt (p)). Then φ∗ |T ({t0 }×M ) = ψt0 ,∗ and φ∗ ∂t =
∂t + XH = N . In particular, φ∗ gJF |S 1 ×M = π ∗ ψt∗ gJ + dt2 . Thus,
φ∗ LN gJF = L∂t φ∗ gJF
= ∂t (π ∗ ψt∗ gJ + dt2 )
= π ∗ ψt∗ LXH gJ
(22)

= φ∗ π ∗ LXH gJ .

By (21) we have
LXH gJ = [θ∇XH ,gJ ],
where [α(·, ·)] denotes the symmetrization. Thus,
1
∗
) ◦ π.
S = (∇gJ XH + ∇gJ XH
2

We say that a Hamiltonian H : M → R is Killing (with respect to some
compatible almost complex structure J) if the flow of XH preserves gJ .
Corollary 5.12. Suppose H is killing, then ∇∇t ≡ 0.

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

31

5.5. Injectivity radius. We turn to discussing the control of the radius of
injectivity of gJH . In the following lemmas fix a point x0 = (s0 , t0 , p0 ) ∈
R × S1 × M .
Lemma 5.13. For any r <

1
2

We have

VolgJH (Br (x0 )) >

r2
VolgJ (Br/3 (p0 )).
9

Proof. Denote by ψt the Hamiltonian flow of H. Since XH +∂t is perpendicular with respect to gJH to hypersurfaces of constant t, we have that Br (x0 )
contains the cylinder
[
[s0 − r/3, s0 + r/3] × {t} × ψt (Br/3 (p0 ))
C =
t∈[t0 −r/3,t0 +r/3]

Since ψt preserves volume we have
VolgJH (C) =

r2
VolgJ (Br/3 (p0 )).
9


Lemma 5.14. Let (M, g) be an n dimensional Riemannian manifold. Let
a > 0 and let p ∈ M such that
 n


1
Volg B 1 (p) ≥ v0
a
a
and such that |Secg (x)| ≤ a2 on B 1 (p). Then there is a constant f =
a
f (v0 , n), independent of a, such that injg (p) ≥ f (v0 , n).
Proof. Cheeger’s Lemma asserts as much for a = 1. The claim follows by
scaling.

Lemma 5.15. Suppose (M, g) is a-bounded at p. Then there is a constant
C = C(n) > 0 such that
 n
1
Volg (B1/a (p)) ≥ C
.
a
Proof. By scaling, the claim is equivalent to the claim that there is a constant
C(n) > 0 such that a geodesic ball of radius 1 with sectional curvature
bounded by 1 has volume at least C(n). By the Jacobi equation, sectional
curvature controls the derivatives of the metric in geodesic coordinates. In
particular there is an a priori estimate from below on the determinant of the
metric in these coordinates for a small enough ball around the origin. The
claim follows.

Theorem 5.16. There is a constant i = i(n) such that if gJ is a-bounded
at p0 ∈ M then injgJH (x) ≥ i(n)
a .

32

YOEL GROMAN

Proof. Combining Lemmas 5.13 and 5.15 we have that there is a constant
such that
 n+2
1
1
VolgJH (B1/a (x)) ≥ n+2 C(n)
.
3
a
The claim follows by Lemma 5.14.



5.6. Some criteria for boundedness.
Lemma 5.17. Suppose gJ is a-bounded at p ∈ M and H is a time independent Hamiltonian such that
n

 
o
T 
(23)
max k∇XH (p)k2 , ∇2 XH  , ∇XH ∇XH + ∇XH
< a2 .
Then for a constant c = c(n) independent of a, we have that gJH is cabounded at p.
Proof. We need to estimate the sectional curvature and radius of injectivity
of gJH . Up to multiplication by a constant dependent on n, estimating sectional curvature is the same as estimating the coefficients of the curvature
tensor in an orthonormal basis. Since J is a-bounded, it remains to estimate
only coefficients involving the direction ∂t + XH at least once. In light of
formulae (18)-(20) we need to estimate ∇S and S 2 where S = ∇t. Theorem 5.11 provides us with an estimate on S 2 and the tangential restriction
of ∇S in terms of ∇XH and ∇2 XH . It remains to estimate the right hand
side of (18). For this it is preferable to use the formula
−RN = LN S − S 2 .
See [23]. Each summand vanishes on N . So it remains to estimate LN S
applied to a tangential vector. Let V be a tangential vector field which
commutes with N. Then
LXH +∂t (SV ) = LXH (SV )
J
(XH )
= ∇gXJH (SV ) − ∇gSV
J
= (∇gXJH S)V + S(∇gVJ XH ) − ∇gSV
(XH ).

This shows that estimate (23) implies SecgJH (p) ≤ c2 a2 for an appropriate
c = c(n). Theorem 5.16 provides us with the estimate on injgJH in terms of
injgJ (p). The claim follows.

The following Lemma whose proof is left for the reader is an alternative
to invoking Lemma 23 in some instances.
Lemma 5.18. Let (H1 , J) be a Floer datum and let H2 be a time dependent
Hamiltonian such that XH2 ≤ C for some constant C. Then gH1 +H2 is C 2 quasi-isometric to gH1 . In particular, when J is i-bounded and H is such
that kXH k is bounded we have that JH is i-bounded.

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

33

Example 5.19. Let (Σ, α) be a contact manifold and let
(M = R+ × Σ, ω = er (dα + dr ∧ α))
be the convex end of its symplectization. Denote the Reeb vector field on Σ
by R. Fix an ω-compatible translation invariant almost complex structure
J satisfying JR = ∂r. Then
gJ = er (dr2 + gΣ ),

(24)

for some metric gΣ on Σ. Since the metric gJ scales up, the radius of
injectivity of gJ is bounded away from 0, and in fact goes to ∞ with r. Let
now H be a smooth time independent Hamiltonian. Pick local coordinates
on Σ and use the function r as the coordinate on the R+ factor. Then the
left hand side of (23) is controlled by the squares of the partial derivatives of
H up to order 3 in these coordinates. Indeed, applying the Koszul formula
to the metric (24), we have
h∇∂i ∂j, ∂k i ∼ er .
Since k∂i k2 ∼ er , for some constant C we have k∇∂i k ≤ C. Similarly,
k∇2ij ∂k k2 ∼ er ,
allowing us to deduce that
k∇2 ∂k k ∼ e−r/2 .
Thus, writing
XH =

X

fi ∂i ,

we find after writing everything out that the left hand side of (23) is controlled by the square of the derivatives up to order 2 of the fi .
Example 5.20. Continuing with the previous example, let h : R →P
R satisfy
that there exists a monotone sequence ti and a divergent series
ai such
that the following hold.
(a)
p
√
1
1
ti+1 − ti ≥
+
.
ai ai+1

2 √
2 
√
we have
(b) For any t ∈
ti − a1i ,
ti + a1i


2
|h0 (t)| + |h00 (t)| + |h(3) (t)| ≤ a2i .

Then any (H, J) on the symplectization where H which is of the form
H = h(er ) outside a compact set and J is of contact type is geometrically dissipative. To see this, note that the function er is roughly the square
of the distance to Σ.
Suppose now the Reeb flow is Killing. Then we can relax the requirements
on the first derivative of h. Namely we can allow the first derivative to be a
constant of any size on the appropriate intervals.

34

YOEL GROMAN

Example 5.21. Consider the case of the cotangent bundle T ∗ M of a compact
manifold M , let g be a Riemannian metric on M and let J be the Sasaki
almost complex structure on T ∗ M . It is defined as follows: the Levy-Civita
connection on T ∗ M induces a splitting T T ∗ M = V ⊕ H into horizontal
and vertical vectors. Moreover, we take J : V ' H to be the natural
isomorphism identifying an element of V with an element of T ∗ M , then via
ω with an element of T M and finally with an element of H via horizontal
lifting. Identifying T M = T ∗ M , in standard local Darboux coordinates
{qi , pi = dqi }, where qi are geodesic coordinates centered at a point q, J is
given in the fiber over q by
J

∂
∂
=
.
∂pi
∂qi

Then it is easy to show that the metric gJ is kpk-bounded at the point (p, q).
In particular, J is p
i-bounded (but not bounded). Consider a Hamiltonian
of the form H = a|p|2 + V ◦ π, where π : T ∗ M → M is the standard
projection and V : M →
p R is smooth, JH is i-bounded. Indeed, denoting
by M the maximum of |V | over M we have in local coordinates as above



1 
X ∂ 
kXH k = aM
pi

 ≤ aM.
2kpk 
∂qi 
i

So, the claim follows from Lemma 5.18. Note that mechanical Hamiltonians
of the form |p|2 + V ◦ π are not i-bounded with respect to the Sasaki metric.
6. Loopwise dissipativity
6.1. Diameter control of Floer trajectories. Suppose (H, J) is i-bounded,
let u be a Floer trajectory, and let ũ be its graph. Suppose that for some
precompact U ⊂ R × S 1 , we have control over u(∂U ). Theorem 4.10 above
then provides with control over u(U ) in terms of
E(ũ; U ) = E(u; U ) + Area(U ).
This indicates that the only source of non-compactness in the moduli space
of finite energy Floer trajectories comes from the potential existence of finite
energy solutions with one end converging to infinity. This motivates the
following definition.
Fix a point p ∈ M and define a function gH,J (r1 , r2 ) by gH,J (r1 , r2 ) ≤ E
if there is a Floer trajectory of energy E defined on a finite cylinder with
one end in Br1 (p) and the other end in M \ Br2 (p).
Definition 6.1. We say that (H, J) is loopwise dissipative on-shell
(LDOS) if for any r1 we have that gH,J (r1 , r) is unbounded as r → ∞.
For any function g : R × R → R such that gH,J ≤ g, we say that (H, J) is
g-LDOS. We say that (H, J) is strongly LDOS if there is a uniform (with
respect to gJ ) open neighborhood of (H, J) in C 1 × C 0 which is LDOS.

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

35

Note that the choice of the point p in the definition of g is of no consequence.
(0)

Definition 6.2. Denote by Fd (M ) the set of i-bounded Floer data (H, J)
(0)
which are strongly LDOS. Elements of Fd (M ) are referred to as dissipative Floer data.
Our next Theorem shows that dissipativity is all we need for diameter
control. We have already seen how to verify the i-boundedness condition.
In the ensuing sections we consider a number of quantitative (“off-shell”)
refinements of the LDOS condition. These refinements are used to show
both that on a geometrically bounded manifold there is always a sufficient
supply Floer data satisfying the LDOS condition and that this property can
be verified directly in numerous settings.
In the following theorem recall Definitions 5.5 and 5.6 of an i-bounded
Floer datum and family of Floer data.
Theorem 6.3. Let (S, Fs∈S = (Hs , Js )) be a uniformly i-bounded family of
(broken) genus 0 Riemann surfaces with i cylindrical ends. Let (Hi , Ji ) ∈
(0)
Fd be Floer data such that on the ith end, Fs coincides with (Hi , Ji ) for all
s ∈ S . Then for any compact K ⊂ M and any real number E, there is an
R = R(E, K) such that for any s ∈ S and any Fs -Floer solution (Σ, u) with
E(u) ≤ E and intersecting ∂K is contained in BR (K). Moreover, if K is a
level set of H with no degenerate periodic orbits in a neighborhood of ∂K,
we can take R(E, K) → 0 as E → 0.
Proof. By definition, we can decompose Σ into a thick part consisting of
components Ai with a-priori bounded area and ends Bi where the Floer
data are translation invariant. The number of components is bounded a
priori in terms of S. For each Ai , the graph ũ = id × u : Ai → Ai × M is JF
holomorphic and has energy bounded by E + Area(Ai ). If u|Ai intersects
some compact set K then, since ũ extends to a neighborhood of Ai , part
(b) of Theorem 4.10 applied to the graph ũ implies that u(Ai ) is contained
in a ball BR (K) for some R depending only on the taming data. It follows
that each of the ends Ii has a boundary component contained in BR (K).
Loopwise Floer dissipativity on the ends Bi implies there is an R1 such that,
writing Bi = I × S 1 for some interval I, we have that u({s} × S 1 ) intersects
BR1 (K) for each s ∈ I. Restricting u to (s − 1, s + 1) × S 1 and invoking
Theorem 4.10 again, we obtain the an R2 such that for any s ∈ I, we have
u((s − 1, s + 1) × S 1 ) ⊂ BR2 (BR1 (K)). In particular, the same holds for
u(Bi ). Since the number of components is bounded a-priori, we obtain an
R as required.
For the last statement we rely on the following property of Floer trajectories which is stated in [26]. There are constants c and ~ such that
Z
Z
8
2
2
k∂s uk2 + cr2 .
k∂s uk < ~ ⇒ k∂s uk (s, t) < 2
πr Br (s,t)
Br (s,t)

36

YOEL GROMAN

Once we know that a solution is contained in an a-priori compact set, we can
take all the constants to be fixed by that compact set. By taking r = E(u)1/4
we deduce that for an appropriate constant
k∂t u − XH k2 = k∂s uk2 < CE(u)1/2 ,
once E(u) is small enough. It follows that making E(u) arbitrarily small,
u will be contained in an arbitrarily small neighborhood of some periodic
orbit.

We conclude this subsection with a counterexample showing that geometric boundedness alone does not guarantee loopwise dissipativity.
Example 6.4. Consider (M, ω) = (R × S 1 , ds ∧ dt). Let
H(s, t) = s − ln(s + 1),
and let J be multiplication by i. Then (H, J) is readily seen to be i-bounded
but it is not LDOS. Indeed, the map u : R+ × S 1 → M defined by u(s, t) =
(ln(s + 1), t) is an (H, J)-partial Floer trajectory of finite energy and infinite
diameter.
6.2. Loopwise dissipativity. A path γ : [a, b] → LM is -gradient for a
Floer datum (H, J) if it satisfies
k∇AH (γs ) − ∂s γk < ,

&

max {AH (γs ) − AH (γs0 )} < .

s≤s0 ∈[a,b]

Define the energy of a path γ : [a, b] → LM with respect to H by
Z b

2
EH (γ) = max
k∂s γk , AH (γa ) − AH (γb ) .
a

We say that (H, J) is loopwise dissipative (LD) if there is an  > 0
which satisfies the following. For any compact set K and any constant E
there is an R = R(K, E) such that any -gradient γ : [a, b] → LM with
E(γ) < E and γa ⊂ K satisfies γb ∩ BR (K) 6= ∅.
Informally, this means that it takes an infinite amount of energy to move
a loop to infinity along a path which is not far from being gradient like.
Lemma 6.5. Suppose (H, J) is LD. Then any (H 0 , J 0 ) sufficiently C 1 × C 0
close to (H, J) with respect to the metric gJ is LD.
Proof. If (H 0 , J 0 ) is sufficiently C 1 × C 0 close to (XH , J) then for sufficiently
small 0 , an 0 -gradient for (H 0 , J 0 ) is -sub gradient for (H, J). Moreover,
the energies HH , EH 0 and the metrics gJ , gJ 0 are comparable.

Lemma 6.6. Let u : [a, b] × S 1 → M be a differentiable map. Then we have
R
2
t∈SR1 d (u(a, t), u(b, t))
.
(b − a) ≥
2
[a,b]×S 1 k∂s uk

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

37

Proof. By the Cauchy Schwartz inequality we have
Z
Z
2
`2 (u(t × [a, b]))dt
k∂s uk ≥
(b − a)
t∈S 1
[a,b]×S 1
Z
≥
d2 (u(a, t), u(b, t)).
t∈S 1


Lemma 6.7. Suppose (H, J) is J-proper. Then (H, J) is LD if and only if
the following holds. There is a constant δ > 0 and an exhaustion {Ki } such
that any -gradient u with negative end in Ki and positive end in M \ Ki+1
satisfies
E(u) > δ.
Proof. One direction is obvious from the definition. In the other direction,
suppose there is an  > 0 and an exhaustion as in the statement of the
Lemma. We prove (H, J) is loopwise dissipative by induction on the smallest
integer n bounding E(u)/δ. When n = 1, this just the assumption. Suppose
we have proven the statement for all -gradients satisfying E(u) ≤ nδ. Let
u be an -gradient with negative end in Ki and E(u) ≤ (n + 1)δ. Let
s1 = inf{s ∈ [a, b] : us ⊂ M \ Ki+1 }
If this set is empty there is nothing to prove. Otherwise, let
s2 = inf{s ∈ [s1 , b] : k∂s uk < 1} ∪ {b}.
Finally, take
s0 = sup{s ∈ [a, s1 ] : k∂s uk < 1} ∪ {a}.
We have s2 − s0 < E. So, by Lemma 6.6, there is a t ∈ S 1 such that
d(us0 (t), us2 (t)) < E. By the estimate k∂s usi k < 1 we get k∇AH k < 1 + 
for i = 0, 2. Combining this, Lemma 5.8, and the fact that us0 meets Ki ,
we obtain an i0 depending only on E and i such that us2 ⊂ Ki+i0 . We have
E(u|[s2 ,b] ) ≤ nδ, so there is an i1 depending on i0 and n such that ub meets
Ki+i0 +i1 . The claim now follows.

Theorem 6.8. Let J be geometrically bounded. Then there is a δ > 0
such that any proper Hamiltonian with kXH k < δ is LD. Moreover, it is
dissipative.
Proof. Let u : [a, b] × S 1 → M be an -gradient such that
max H ◦ u(a, t) < x1 < x2 < min H ◦ u(b, t).
t

Then
Z
(25)

E(u) ≥ (x2 − x1 ) −

u∗ ω.

We will show
R that
 if we take δ and  small enough, there are constants δ1 , δ2
∗

such that
u ω  > δ1 ⇒ E(u) > δ2 . It will then follow from (25) that if
x2 − x1 > 2δ1 then E(u) > min{δ1 , δ2 } proving the claim by Lemma 6.7.

38

YOEL GROMAN

We show the existence of constants δ, δ1 and δ2 as above. We take δ
so small that any loop of length 2δ has diameter less than the radius of
convexity of M with respect to gJ . The isoperimetric inequality guarantees
there is a constant c such that any loop of length < 2δ is fillable by a disk
v : D → M such that
Z
v ∗ ω ≤ Area(v) < cδ 2 .
D

cδ 2

We take  = δ, δ0 =

and δ1 = 2δ0 . Given u as above, let

I = {s ∈ [a, b]|`(u(s, ·)) > 2δ}.
For any component (c, d) of I we have the estimate
Z




∗ 
u ω  ≤ Area(u) ≤ 3E(u; (c, d) × S 1 ).

 (c,d)×S 1

The first of these is Wirtinger’s inequality. For the second, note that
Z
Z
1
Area(u) ≤
k∂s ukk∂t uk ≤
(k∂s uk2 + k∂t uk2 ),
2
1
1
(c,d)×S
(c,d)×S
But,
4δ 2 ≤

Z

k∂t uk2 ≤

S1

Z

k∂t u − XH k2 +

Z

S1

Z
≤

kXH k2

S1

k∂s uk2 + 2 + δ 2

S1

Z

k∂s uk2 + 2δ 2
Z
1
2
k∂t uk2 .
≤ k∂s uk +
2 S1
=

S1

So,
k∂t uk2 ≤ 2k∂s uk2
which implies the desired
R inequality.
Suppose now that | [a,b]×S 1 u∗ ω| ≥ 4δ1 . Then I 6= ∅. Otherwise, we could
fill the boundary of u by disks contained in a contractible ball of radius
≤R 2δ and obtain a contractible sphere which would imply the contradiction
| [a,b]×S 1 u∗ ω| < δ1 . Suppose I contains a connected neighborhood of either
a or b which contributes at least δ1 to |u∗ ω| . In this case E(u) > 31 δ1 . In the
remaining case let a0 = inf[a, b] \ I, b0 = sup[a, b] \ I, and let I 0 = [a0 , b0 ]. The
contribution to u∗ ω coming from restricting u to I 0 × S 1 is more than 2δ1 .
So, there must be a component (c, d) ⊂ I such that filling the boundary of
u|(c,d)×S 1 by disks contained in a contractible ball of radius ≤ 2δ we obtain a
non-contractible sphere. Such a sphere has area at least δ3 for some constant
depending only on the bound on the geometry9. We assume that δ is chosen
9This can be seen by applying the monotonicity formula to a minimizing current.

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

39

small enough that δ3 > 2δ0 . Then,
1
E(u; (c, d) × S 1 ) > (δ3 − 2δ0 ).
3
Taking δ2 = 13 min{δ0 , δ3 − 2δ0 } we obtain that (H, J) is LD. To establish
dissipativity, we need to prove, in addition, i-boundedness. This follows
immediately from Lemma 5.18.

6.3. Bidirectedness. To obtain directedness, we need to slightly weaken
the definition of loopwise dissipativity as follows. A path γ : [a, b] → LM is
said to be (C, )-tame with respect to (J, H) for some constants C, , if for
any s ∈ [a − , b + ] we have
Z s+

C
2 0
k∇∂s γk ds +  .
diamgJH (γs ) <

s−
We say that (H, J) is weakly loopwise dissipative (WLD) if it satisfies
the loopwise dissipativity condition but only for (C, )-tame paths. Namely,
There exist an  > 0 and a C > 0 such that for any compact set K and any
constant E there is an R = R(K, E) such that any (C, )-tame -gradient
γ : [a, b] → LM with E(γ) < E and γa ⊂ K we have that γb ∩ BR (K) 6= ∅.
The set of weakly loopwise dissipative Hamiltonians is open in the sense
of Lemma 6.5 and satisfies Lemma 6.7 with the weakly loopwise dissipative
condition replacing the loopwise dissipative condition.
Lemma 6.9. If (H, J) is WLD and i-bounded, it is strongly LDOS.
Proof. If u : [a, b] × S 1 → M is a solution to Floer’s equation, ũ = × u :
[a, b] × S 1 → R × M̃ is JH holomorphic. By part (b) of 4.10, we get that u is
(C, )-tame for appropriate constants. Thus being LD for tame - gradients
implies being LD on shell.

Lemma 6.10. Suppose (H, J) is WLD with constants C and . Moreover,
assume that H is J-proper with respect to J. Then there is an R > 0 such
that the following holds. Let let {Ki } and δ be as in Lemma 6.7. Suppose
that for some infinite sequence {(ni , ci )} we have H 0 − H ≡ ci and J 0 = J
on BR (Kni +1 \ Kni ). Then (H 0 , J 0 ) is also WLD. In fact, any (C, )-tame
 gradient whose image meets both Kni and the complement of Kni +1 has
energy at least δ.
Proof. Let R = 4C/. First observe that any loop α : S 1 → M satisfying diamgJH (α) < R/2 and which intersects Ki+1 \ Ki is contained in
BR/2 (Ki+1 \ Ki ). This follows as in the proof of Lemma 5.9 by our assumption on H. Obviously, the same will be remain true if we replace H by a
function H 0 satisfying H 0 ≡ H + c on BR/2 (Ki+1 \ Ki ).
Let γ : [a, b] → LM be an -gradient for (H 0 , J 0 ) which is also (C, )-tame
with respect to (H 0 , J 0 ). Write ds := diamgJ 0 (γs ). Let
H

Li := BR (Kni +1 \ Kni ).

40

YOEL GROMAN

Suppose γa ⊂ Kni \Li and γb ⊂ M \BR (Kni +1 ). If there is an s ∈ [a+, b−]
for which ds > 2C/ = R/2 then by the definition of tameness, E(γ) > 1. So
suppose that ds ≤ R/2 for all s ∈ [a+, b−]. If γb− meets Kni +1 then since
db− ≤ R/2 for we have mint d(γb (t), γb− (t)) ≥ R/2. So, by Lemma 6.6, we
2
get that E(γ) ≥ R4 . We get a similar estimate if γa+ meets Kni +1 \ Kni . In
the remaining case we can find an s0 < s1 such that restricting γ to [s0 , s1 ]
we have that γs ⊂ Lni , γs0 ⊂ Kni and γs1 ⊂ M \ Kni +1 . So, E(γ) ≥ δ. 
Corollary 6.11. Let J be geometrically bounded. There are constants 0
and δ0 with the following significance. Let H : S 1 × M → R be J-proper and
bounded below and suppose there is an infinite sequence hn → ∞ ∈ R such
that h2n+1 − h2n > δ0 and kXH k < 0 on H −1 ([h2n , h2n+1 ]). Then (H, J)
dissipative.
Proof. Theorem 6.8 and Lemma 6.10 imply that (H, J) is WLD and hence,
by , strongly LDOS. Boundedness of kXH k on the sets H −1 ([h2n , h2n+1 ])
implies quasi-isometry ofgJH with the product metric ds2 + dt2 + gJ on these
sets, which in turn implies i-boundedness.

Theorem 6.12. For each J which is geometrically bounded and each exhaustion function H : S 1 × M → R+ there is an exhaustion function H 0 > H
which is such that (H, J) is dissipative.
Proof. According to [12] there exists an exhaustion function f : M → R
such that k∇f k = kXH k < 0 . So, f is dissipative by Theorem 6.8. Let
h : R → R be any monotone function such that h0 (x) = 1 on any of the
intervals [2nδ, (2n+ 1)δ and arbitrary otherwise. The set of such h is cofinal.
Considering the sequence hn = nδ0 , the previous lemma implies (H, J) is
WLD.

Theorem 6.13. Let H : S 1 × M → R+ be an exhaustion function and let J
be geometrically bounded. Then there is a function G ≤ H such that (H, J)
is dissipative.
Proof. It suffices to exhibit an exhaustion function G ≤ H which has sufficiently small gradient. Let J be geometrically bounded and take all metric
quantities with respect to gJ . Fix a point p ∈ M and let Ri be monotone increasing sequence such that BRi contains H −1 ((−∞, i]). Denote by
h : M → R the distance function h(x) = d(x, p). Define ai inductively by
a0 = 0 and
ai = min{i − 1, ai−1 + Ri − Ri−1 }
for i ≥ 1. Let f : R+ → R be the piecewise linear function which is
smooth at non-integer points and satisfies fi = ai for i ≥ 1. Note that f
is monotone increasing, proper and has slope at most 1 wherever the slope
is defined. So, the function g = f ◦ h is 1-Lipschitz. Moreover, g ≤ H
everywhere. The function g can be C0 -approximated by a smooth function
k with k∇kk ≤ 2 [12]. Let G = k/C for a sufficiently large constant C, then
G will be admissible.


FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

41

6.4. Dissipativity on exact symplectic manifolds. Let (M, ω) be an
exact symplectic manifold. Fix an almost complex structure J ∈ Jτ . And
let H : S 1 × M → R. The pair (H, J) is said to be Palais-Smale if any
sequence of loops γn with AH (γn ) < c < ∞ and k∇AH (γn )kL2 → 0 has
a subsequence converging to a periodic orbit of H. If J0 , J1 are almost
complex structures which are quasi-isometric and H0 , H1 are Hamiltonians
such that k∇(H0 − H1 )k converges to 0 with respect to either then (H0 , J0 )
is Palais-Smale if and only if (H1 , J1 ) is.
Lemma 6.14. Suppose (H, J) as i-bounded and Palais-Smale. Then for
any c, d there is a compact set K with the following significance. For any
segment [a, b] and any solution u : [a − 1, b + 1] → M to Floer’s equation
such that AH (u(s, ·)) ∈ [c, d] for s ∈ [a − 1, b + 1], we have u([a, b]) ⊂ K.
Proof. First, by the Palais-Smale condition, there are an  > 0 and a compact K 0 ⊂ M such that any loop α with k∇AH (α)k <  and AH (α) < c
meets K 0 . Thus for all but a subset I ⊂ [a−1, b+1] of total measure (d−c)/
we have that u(s, ·) meets K 0 and thus, applying part (b) of Theorem 4.10
to the graph ũ, when s ∈ [a, b], is contained in some larger compact set K
depending only on K 0 and c − d. The same argument then applies for s ∈ I
since we control the boundary of I and I has a-priori bounded measure. 
Corollary 6.15. If (H, J) is Palais-Smale, it is LDOS.
Proof. Combine the Lemma 6.14 and Lemma 6.6.



Theorem 6.16. If F and (Hi , Ji ) are as in Theorem 6.3 with the (Hi , Ji )
required to be Palais-Smale instead of dissipative, the conclusion of Theorem 6.3 holds.
Proof. We have action estimates to control by applying the previous Lemma
all but a set of a-priori bounded measure. We thus gain control of the
boundary of the remainder, and thus, since it has a priori bounded measure,
of all the remainder.

Example 6.17. Let α be a primitive of ω and let Z be the ω dual of α. For
any time independent Hamiltonian H, define the function f : M → R by
f (x) = ω(Z(x), XH (x)) − H(x).
Suppose f is proper and bounded below and J is such that for some constant
C, we have
kZ(x)k2 < Cf (x),
outside a compact set. Then H is Palais-Smale.
Proof. We have
Z
(26)

AH (γ) =

Z
f (γ(t)) +

S1

Z
≥

S1

ω(Z(γ(t)), γ 0 (t) − XH (t))dt
s Z

f (γ(t)) − k∇AH (γ)k
S1

C

f (γ(t)).
S1

42

YOEL GROMAN

Suppose AH (γ) ≤ c and k∇AH (γ)k ≤ 1. Since f is proper, estimate (26)
implies that there is a compact set K depending on c only such that γ
intersects K. Given a sequence γn of loops intersecting K such that
Z
kXH (t) − γn0 (t)k → 0
k∇AH (γ)kL2 ≥
S1

it is a standard fact that the sequence converges to an integral loop of
XH .

In particular, consider the convex end of a symplectization R+ × Σ as in
Example 5.19. Denote by r the coordinate on R+ and by σ the coordinate
on Σ. If H satisfies
lim er (∂r H)(er , σ) − H(er , σ) → ∞,

r→∞

and J is any complex structure satisfying
er α(J∂r) ≤ C(er ∂r H(er , σ) − H(er , σ))
for some C, then H is Palais-Smale. This holds in particular for contact
type J, i.e., satisfying J∂r = R where R is the Reeb flow of α on Σ. After
a C 2 -small perturbation (H, J) will satisfy the same estimates, so it will
remain Palais-Smale. In addition, it will be non-degenerate.
Example 6.18. Continuing with the convex end of a symplectization, any
function which is of the form h(er ) such that er h0 (er ) − h(er ) ≥ Cer for
some constant C is Palais-Smale. This holds, e.g., for h a power function of
h(x) = x ln x. When er h0 (er ) − h(er ) → c < ∞ for some c which is not in
the period spectrum, H is still Palais-Smale even though this is not covered
by the previous example. A proof of this fact is given below.
6.5. Some non-exact examples. Let (M, g) be a Riemannian manifold,
let V be a time dependent vector field on M . For p in M define
Z 1

0
2
f (p, V, g) :=
inf
kγ (t) − Vt ◦ γ(t)k dt .
{γ:[0,1]→M |γ(0)=γ(1)=p}

0

Clearly, f is continuous with respect to all variables in the C 0 norm. We
drop g from the notation when there is no ambiguity.
Lemma 6.19. Let (H, J) be J-proper. Suppose there is a compact K ⊂ M
and an  > 0 such that for all p ∈ M \ K we have f (p, XH , gJ ) ≥ . Then
(H, J) is LD.
Proof. Let u : [a, b] × S 1 be an /2-gradient with boundary in a compact
set K0 ⊃ K and energy E(u) ≤ E for some E. Then for R large enough, if
u(b, ·) ⊂ M \ BR (K0 ), Lemma 6.6 implies we have (b − a) > 2E/. There
is an s ∈ [b − 2E/, b] with k∇AH k2 < . If we choose R large enough then
Lemma 6.6 implies that u(s, ·) intersects M \BR/2 (K0 ) and so by Lemma 5.8
is contained in M \ K0 ⊂ M \ K. This contradicts the assumption.


FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

43

Example 6.20. Using the notation of Example 5.19, let M have an end
modeled on Σ × R+ and let H0 be a function which is linear at infinity
with slope a not in the period spectrum. Let X = XH0 |Σ×{1} . Let J be a
translation invariant almost complex structure. Then f (p, XH0 ) is bounded
away from 0, and so H0 is LD.
Let δ be the distance of c to the period spectrum of Σα and let H1 be any
Hamiltonian such that
kXH1 − XH0 k
 δ/2.
kXH0 k
For example, this inequality will hold for our choice of J whenever kXH1 −H0 k
is bounded. Then f (p, XH1 ) is bounded away from 0 at infinity. So, H1 is
also LD.
Example 6.21. Let M1 be as in the previous example and let M2 be a compact symplectic manifold. Let a be a real number not in the period spectrum
of M1 and let f : S 1 × M1 × M2 be any function which tends to 1 at infinity
with derivatives dominated by o(e−r/2 ). Then reasoning as in the previous
example, the function H := af er is LD.
Lemma 6.22. Let the end of M be diffeomorphic to Σ × R+ with Σ a
compact hypersurface. Suppose the projection π : Σ × R+ → Σ satisfies
kπ∗ vk ≤ kvk for any tangent vector v. Let X be vector field on Σ with no
1-periodic orbits and let H be such that π∗ XH converges uniformly to X.
Then for some δ > 0 we have f (p, XH ) > δ > 0 and in particular XH is
LD.
Proof. Let  such that f (p, X) > . For r large enough, the convergence
assumption implies
f (p, π∗ XH ) > /2.
The assumption of non-increasing implies f (p, XH ) > f (p, π∗ XH ).

Example 6.23. Let M, Σ, α, H0 and H1 be as in Example 6.20. Let σ be
a closed two form on Σ. Suppose σ extends to a closed form on M which
is invariant under the Liouville flow near Σ. Then σ can be extended in
a translation invariant way to a closed two form on the completion of M ,
still denoted by σ. For t small enough, the form ωtσ = −dα + tσ defines a
symplectic form on the completion of M . By rescaling σ assume this holds
for t = 1. Then H0 and H1 are LD for the symplectic form ωσ . Indeed,
0
write XH
for the Hamiltonian vector field with respect to ωσ . Let X as in
0
Example 6.20. Then all the requirements of Lemma 6.22 are satisfied for
0 , X. The claim for H now follows by comparison to H .
the pair XH
1
0
0
Example 6.24. In Example 6.20 assume Σ, α is not necessarily contact but
stable Hamiltonian for the restriction ω1 := ω|Σ×1 with stabilizing form α.
Namely, α satisfies ker ω ⊂ ker dα and α∧ω n−1 > 0. Assume ω is of the form
ωα := ω + d(er α) on Σ × R≥0 and is symplectic for all r ≥ 1. Assume further that there exists a translation invariant ωα -compatible almost complex

44

YOEL GROMAN

structure J on Σ × R≥0 . Then the forms ω(·, J) and dα(·, J) are separately
non-negative. So, the projection π∗ is norm non-increasing. So if H0 is linear
at infinity with slope not in the period spectrum then f (p, XH0 ) is bounded
away from 0 and H0 is dissipative. The same will hold under a sufficiently
small deformation of ω or a sufficiently small Hamiltonian perturbation of
XH0 .
In all the examples of this section we have considered Hamiltonians which
are roughly linear at infinity. It is easy to use these examples to construct
super-linear Hamiltonians which are LDOS. It is an interesting question
what Hamiltonians can be perturbed to satisfy LDOS. The property of being
LDOS is clearly related the behavior of the function f (p, XH , gJ ). Namely, if
one can find an exhaustion for which this function is appropriately bounded
away from 0 near the boundaries, the Floer datum will be LDOS.
7. Proof of Theorem 2.1
7.1. Floer systems. For a symplectic manifold (M, ω), denote by J (M, ω)
the set of ω-compatible almost complex structures on M . Let
F ⊂ C ∞ (S 1 × M ) × C ∞ (S 1 , J (M, ω))
denote the set of Floer data (H, J) such that the Hamiltonian flow of H is
defined for all time and the metric gJt := ω(·, Jt ·) is complete for any t ∈ S 1 .
Denoting by ∆i the standard simplex let
F i ⊂ C ∞ (∆i , F),
be the subset consisting of elements which are constant in a neighborhood
of the vertices. Furthermore, we require that for any F ∈ F (1) , ∂s F ≥ 0.
Denote by ∆i,o the interior of the simplex. Fix once and for all diffeomorphisms
σ : R → ∆1,o ,
ψ : R × (0, 1) → ∆2,o ,
such that there is an increasing diffeomorphism
ρ : (0, 1) → (0, ∞),
for which
lim ψ(s + ρ(t), t) = δ 0 ◦ σ(s),

t→1

lim ψ(s − ρ(t), t) = δ 2 ◦ σ(s),

t→1

lim ψ(s ± ρ(t), t) = δ 1 ◦ σ(s),

t→0

uniformly on compact subsets of R. Here δ i : ∆1 → ∂∆2 is the standard
face map missing the ith vertex. We extend the maps ψ ± := ψ(· ± ρ(·), ·) to
the closure R × [−1, 1] in the obvious way.

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

45

Definition 7.1. A Floer datum (H, J) ∈ F (0) is called tame if for any
E > 0 and any compact K ⊂ M there is an R = R(E, K) > 0 such that
any solution u to Floer’s equation
∂s u + J(∂t u − XH ) = 0
satisfying
E(u) :=

1
2

Z

k∂s uk2 ≤ E,

u(R × S 1 ) ∩ K 6= ∅,

is contained in the ball BR (K).
A homotopy F = (Hs , Js ) ∈ F (1) is called tame if the corresponding
condition holds for the solutions to


∂s u + Jσ(s) (t) ∂t u − XHσ(s) (t, u(s, t)) = 0.
Finally, an element {Fp }p∈∆2 ∈ F (2) is called tame if the corresponding
condition holds for the set of solutions to


∂s u + J(t) ∂t u − XHψ(s±ρ(τ ),τ ) (t, u(s, t)) = 0, τ ∈ [0, 1],
(i)

with R independent of τ . Denote by Ftame ⊂ F the subset consisting of
tame elements.
Definition 7.2. A Floer system D on M consists of the data of subsets
(i)
D(i) ⊂ Ftame for i = 0, 1, 2 such that the following hold:
(a) For any element F ∈ D(i) there is an  > 0 such that any F 0 for
which kF − F 0 k <  in C 1 × C 0 is also in D(i) .
(b) A face of an element of D(i) is an element of D(i−1) .
(c) For any pair Fi = (Hi , Ji ) ∈ D(0) , i = 0, 1 such that H1 ≥ H0 , there
is a homotopy {Fs }s∈[0,1] ∈ D(1) with endpoints F0 and F1 .
(d) Given a pair F 0 , F 00 ∈ D(1) such that F10 = F000 there is a G ∈ D(2)
whose restriction to the {0, 1} and {1, 2} faces coincides with F 0 and
F 00 respectively.
(e) Given homotopies F01 , F12 , F02 ∈ D(1) , such that the endpoints of Fij
are Fi and Fj respectively, there is a G ∈ D2 whose face ij coincides
with Fij .
A Floer system D is said to be invariant if it is invariant under the action
of the symplectomorphism group given by
ψ · (H, J) = (H ◦ ψ, ψ ∗ J).
Elements of D0 will be referred to as D-admissible. A function H ∈ C ∞ (M )
is said to be D-admissible if there is an almost complex structure J such that
(H, J) ∈ D. A bi-directed Floer system is one in which for any admissible
H1 and H2 there are admissible H3 and H0 such that
H3 ≥ max{H1 , H2 },

46

YOEL GROMAN

and
H0 ≤ min{H1 , H2 }.
A Floer system can be seen as special kind of (∞, 1)-category, where all
triangles are fillable and there is a morphism between monotone ordered
objects by including higher simplices in the obvious way. Theorem 7.12
below, which is just Floer’s theorem[11] with minor adaptations, gives a
functor from such a category to chain complexes. In Theorem 7.4 below
we show that on any geometrically bounded manifold there is a canonically
defined invariant cofinal Floer system.
(0)

Definition 7.3. We denote as above by Fd (M ) the set of i-bounded
(1)
Floer data (H, J) which are strongly LDOS. Denote by Fd the set of
(0)
monotone paths (Hs , Js )s∈[0,1] in F (0) with endpoints in Fd such that
the domain dependent Floer datum (s, t) 7→ (H(t, ·)σ(s) dt, J(t, ·)σ(s) ) is i(2)

bounded as in Definition 5.5. Finally, Fd is defined as follows. Let
Fp∈∆2 = (Hp , Jp )p∈∆2 ∈ F (2) with edges in D(1) . Associate to ∆2 and the
map ψ : R × (0, 1) → ∆2 a family Cτ ∈[0,1] of cylinders over the unit interval
degenerating to a broken cylinder in the obvious way. Let the domain dependent Floer datum on Cτ be defined by Fτ (s, t) = (Hψ(s,τ ) (t, ·)dt, Jψ(s,τ ) (t, ·)).
(2)

Then F ∈ Fd iff the family C with this choice of domain dependent Floer
data is uniformly i-bounded as in Definition 5.6.
Theorem 7.4. Let (M, ω) be a semi-positive tame symplectic manifold.
Then Fd (M ) is an invariant bi-directed Floer system on M .
Before proving Theorem 7.4 we need the following lemma.
(0)

Lemma 7.5. Let (Hi , Ji ) ∈ Fd (M ) such that H0 ≤ H1 . There exists an
i-bounded Floer datum on R × S 1 which coincides with (H0 , J0 ) on {s  0}
and with (H1 , J1 ) on {s  0}. Moreover, the set of such Floer data is
contractible in the same sense as in Theorem 4.6.
Proof. By definition such a Floer datum is just a u.i.b 1-parameter family of
almost complex structures on M ×[0, 1]×S 1 of the form JHs for some (Hs , Js )
which satisfies additionally that ∂s Hs ≥ 0. These changes do not affect the
proof of Theorem 4.6. Namely, we fix two disjoint open sets V1 , V2 ⊂ M
such that there is taming data for (Jsi ) supported in Vi × [0, 1] × S 1 for
i = 0, 1. Now take a monotone homotopy (Hs , Js ) which is fixed and equal
to (H0 , J0 ) on [0, 2/3] and to (H1 , J1 ) on [1/3, 1]. Contractibility of the set
of all such homotopies is similar.

Proof of Theorem 7.4. Let Fd (M ) be as in Definition 7.3. We verify that
Fd (M ) has all the required properties. Namely, that it is a Floer system
and that it satisfies the properties guaranteed in Theorem 7.4.
Tameness. This follows from the definition and Theorem 6.3.

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

47

Condition (a). The most involved case is when i = 2 which we treat. Near
each vertex, we have fixed Floer data so by Lemma 6.5 we can pick an  > 0
which maintains dynamical dissipativity for all three of these. The property
of being u.i.b. depends on the metric only up to quasi-isometry which is
preserved for any  < ∞.
Condition (b). This follows by definition.
Condition (c). This is just Lemma 7.5.
Condition (d). For any R > 0 define the homotopy IR = F 0 #R F 00 by


F00 ,
s ≤ −R − 1,



0


s ∈ [−R − 1, −R],
Fs+R ,
0
00
IR,s := F1 = F0 ,
s ∈ [−R, R],


00

Fs−R
s ∈ [R, R + 1],



F 00
s ≥ R + 1.
1
(2)

Define G by Gψ(s,τ ) := Is,ρ(τ ) . It is immediate that G ∈ Fd .
Condition (e). First merge F01 with F12 as in the previous part. Then
homotope to F02 relying on contractibility in Theorem 7.5.
Invariance. Evident from the definition.
Bi-directedness. This follows by Lemma 6.9 and Theorems 6.12 and 6.13.

7.2. Transversality and control of bubbling.
Definition 7.6. Denote by Jreg the set of almost complex structures for
which all moduli spaces
M∗ (A; J),
of non-multiply covered J-holomorphic spheres representing any class A ∈
H 2 (M ; Z) are smooth manifolds of expected dimension. For J ∈ Jreg , let
Hreg (J) denote that set of all non-degenerate Hamiltonians satisfying the
following conditions
(a) The linearization Du of Floer’s equation at a Floer trajectory u is
surjective for all (H, J)-Floer trajectories.
(b) No Floer trajectory with index difference ≤ 2 intersects a J-holomorphic
sphere of Chern number 0.
(c) No periodic orbit of H intersects a J-holomorphic sphere of Chern
number ≤ 1.
Write
(0)
Freg
:= ∪J∈Jreg Hreg (J) × {J}.

Theorem 7.7. Suppose M is semi-positive. Let (H, J) ∈ D(0) and let
(0)
V ⊂ Ftame be an open neighborhood of (H, J) in C ∞ ∩ Ftame . Shrinking V ,
write V = V1 × V2 ⊂ H × J . The set Jreg is of second category in V2 and
for each J ∈ Jreg ∩ V2 , the set Hreg (J) is of second category in V1 .

48

YOEL GROMAN

Proof. Since all the moduli spaces for all the Floer data in V intersecting a
compact set K and possessing energy E are contained, for some R < ∞, in
BR (K), this follows from the compact case. For the compact case see, e.g.,
[14].

(0)

Suppose for i = 0, 1, we have tame elements Fi ∈ Freg and let
F01 := {Fs = (Hs , Js )}s∈∆1 ,
be a tame homotopy between them.
Definition 7.8. Call such a homotopy regular if the following hold.
(a) For any A ∈ H 2 (M ; Z) write
M∗ (A; {Js,t }) := {(s, t, u)|u ∈ M∗ (A; Js,t )}.
Then M∗ (A; {Js,t }) is smooth and of the expected dimension.
(b) For any γ̃1 and γ̃2 the moduli spaces
M(γ̃1 , γ̃2 , F = {Hs,t , Js,t })
of nontrivial continuation trajectories are smooth and of the expected dimension.
(c) There is no continuation trajectory u of index 0 or 1 for which there
is a point (s, t) such that u(s, t) is in the image of a Js,t -holomorphic
sphere of Chern number 0.
Similarly, let F ∈ F (2) with edges corresponding to regular homotopies. For
such an F , ∆(2) parameterizes a family of time dependent Floer data (H, J).
Write (Hs,t,λ , Js,t,λ ) := Fψ(s,λ),t .
We say that F is regular if
(a) The moduli space M∗ (A; {Js,t,λ }) is smooth of the expected dimension.
(b) The corresponding family {uλ } of Floer solutions is smooth of the
expected dimension.
(c) There is no λ for which there is a point (s, t) and a continuation
trajectory uλ of index −1 or 0 such that uλ (s, t) intersects a Js,t,λ holomorphic sphere of Chern number 0.
(i)

Denote by Freg , i = 1, 2, respectively, the regular 1- and 2-simplices of Floer
data.
(i)

(i)

For i = 1, 2 let F i ∈ Ftame and let V (F i ) ⊂ Ftame be an open neighborhood. Let V2 (F i ) ⊂ V (F i ) be the set of elements whose H component
coincides with that of F i .
To achieve transversality in the definition of continuation maps, we wish to
avoid perturbing H01 since it is required to satisfy a monotonicity condition.
Thus we will perturb J01 in an (s, t) dependent manner.
(i)

Theorem 7.9. Suppose M is semi-positive. Then Freg ∩V2 (F i ) is of second
category in V2 (F i ) for i = 1, 2.

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

49

Proof. We need to verify that we can achieve regularity even though we
avoid perturbing H. For the generic smoothness of the moduli spaces see
§16 in [25]. The non-intersection property is a variation of the corresponding
claim in [14]. Namely, for i = 1 to show the is to show that the universal
moduli spaces
N := {(s, t, z, F = (Hs,t , Js,t ), u1 , u2 |F ∈ V2 , u1 (z) = u2 (s, t)}
is a smooth separable Banach space of the expected codimension. Here
u1 ∈ M∗ (Js,t ) and u2 is an F continuation trajectory. For this it suffices
that the evaluation map
R × S 1 × S 2 × {u ∈ M∗ (Js,t )|Js,t ∈ V2 } → R × S 1 × M
defined as
(s, t, z, u) 7→ (s, t, u(z)),
is a submersion. For this, apply Lemma 3.4.3. from [18]. For i = 2 the
argument is similar.

7.3. Floer’s Theorem. In this section we assume throughout that M is
semi-positive.
g of LM from §5.1.
Recall the discussion of the Floer-Novikov covering LM
For each homotopy class a ∈ π1 (M ) let Γa ⊂ R×2Z be the image of π1 (LMa )
under Iω ×Ic . We identify elements of Γa with equivalence classes in π1 (LMa )
modulo ker Iω ∩ ker Ic . For any ring R, define the Novikov ring ΛR,Γa by the
set of formal sums
X
λA T Iω (A) e2Ic (A) ,
A∈Γa

which satisfy for each constant c that
#{A ∈ Γa |λA 6= 0,

ω(A) < c} < ∞.

g a by
We have an action of Γa on LM
A · [x, B] := [x, A#B].
g
This is a covering action, so it restricts to an action on PH.
(0)
Fix a Floer system D. Write Dreg := Freg ∩ D and let F = (H, J) ∈ Dreg .
We define the Floer chain complex CF ∗ (H, J; R) as the set of formal sums
X
λx̃ hx̃i,
^
x̃∈P(H)

satisfying for each constant c that
(27)
CF ∗ (H, J; R)

^ x̃ 6= 0,
#{x̃ ∈ P(H)|λ

AH (x̃) > c} < ∞.

is a graded vector space over R with grading given by i(x̃) :=
iRS (x̃) + n. Here n = 21 dim M . CF ∗ (H, J; R) can be considered as a nonArchimedean Banach space over R with its trivial valuation. The norm on

50

YOEL GROMAN

CF ∗ (H, J; R) for a linear combination of generators is given by


X



AH (γ̃i )
(28)
a
γ̃
.

i i  := max e


{i|ai 6=0}
i

For each homotopy class a, the vector space CF ∗,a (H, J; R) generated by
P^
a (H) is Banach space over the Novikov field ΛR,Γa with scalar multiplication defined via the action of Γa on P^
a (H). The set Pa (H) non-canonically
defines a basis of CF ∗,a (H, J) over ΛR,Γa by choosing a lift to P^
a (H).
Let Γ ⊂ R × Z be a subgroup denote by ΛR,Γ the ring
(
)
X
λi 2ni
ΛR,Γ :=
ai T e |(λi , ni ) ∈ Γ, ai ∈ R, lim λi = ∞ .
i→∞

i

Let Γω ⊂ R × Z be the subgroup generated by ∪a∈π1 (M ) Γa . Write ΛR,ω :=
ΛR,Γω and ΛR := ΛR,R×Z . ΛR is referred to as the universal Novikov field
over R. Henceforth let K be either ΛR or ΛR,ω .
Let
ˆ ΛR,Γ K,
CF ∗ (H, J; K) := ⊕a∈π1 (M ) CF ∗,a (H, J; ΛR,Γa )⊗
a
where the hat denotes completion with respect to the obvious valuation.
Remark 7.10. In the literature there is a slightly different construction of
the Floer chain complexes over the Novikov ring where one tensors the space
generated by P(H) with ΛR instead of passing to a covering space. In that
version, the chain complexes do not have an action filtration nor a grading,
but they do have a Novikov filtration over ΛR . We do not pursue this
approach here.
We define a linear operator d on CF ∗ (H, J; R) by counting Floer trajectories in the usual way. Namely, for any two elements
^
x̃1 , x̃2 ∈ P(H)
of index difference 1 denote by M(x̃1 , x̃2 ; J) the moduli space of Floer trajectories which at −∞ are asymptotic to x̃1 and at +∞ to x̃2 divided by
(0)
the action of R. Since F is tame, M(x̃1 , x̃2 ; J) is compact. Since F ∈ Freg
we get that when the virtual dimension is 0,
#M(x̃1 , x̃2 ; J) < ∞.
We thus define
dx̃1

=

X

#M(x̃1 , x̃2 ; J)hx̃2 i.

x̃2 |iRS (x̃2 )=iRS (x̃1 )+1

Theorem 7.11. The Floer boundary map d is well defined and satisfies
d2 = 0.

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

51

^ we have that dx2 satisfies
Proof. We need to show that for any x1 ∈ P(H)
the finiteness condition (27). For any c, let
n
o
^
Ac := x̃2 ∈ P(H)|M(x̃
AH (x̃2 ) > c .
1 , x̃2 ; J) 6= ∅,
For any x̃ ∈ Ac there is a Floer trajectory of energy at most AH (x̃1 ) − c
connecting x̃1 and x̃2 . Tameness of F thus implies that there is a compact
set K ⊂ M such that any x̃ ∈ Ac is contained in K. The claim now follows
by Gromov compactness. Thus d is well defined. That d2 = 0 follows from
the compact case since all Floer trajectories under a given energy level are
contained in an a priori compact set.

By its definition d commutes with the action of ΛR,Γa and thus induces a
well defined operator on CF ∗ (H, J; K).
Theorem 7.12 (Floer’s Theorem). Let M be a semi-positive symplectic
manifold. Let D be a Floer system. Then there exists a dense subsystem
Dreg such that
(0)

(a) for any F = (H, J) ∈ Dreg the graded filtered complex
(CF ∗ (H, J; K), d),
is well defined.
(0)
(b) For any pair of elements F1 ≤ F2 ∈ Dreg we have that
(1)
Dreg
(F1 , F2 ) 6= ∅.
(1)

Associated with any homotopy F 12 ∈ Dreg (F1 , F2 ) is a chain map
fF 12 : CF ∗ (F 1 ) → CF ∗ (F 2 ),
defined by counting the corresponding rigid Floer solutions. If F1 −
F2 = c and F 12 is of the form Fs12 = (H + f (s), J), then fF 12 is the
identity.
(0)
(1)
(c) For any triple F0 ≤ F1 ≤ F2 ∈ Dreg , and elements Fij ∈ Dreg (Fi , Fj ),
(2)
the set Dreg (F01 , F12 , F02 ) is non-empty. Any element
(2)
F ∈ Dreg
(F01 , F12 , F02 )

defines a chain homotopy between the map fF02 and the composition
fF12 ◦ fF01 by counting the corresponding rigid Floer solutions.
Proof. We take as above Dreg := D ∩ Freg . By the theorems in the previous
subsection, Dreg is dense in D.
(a) This is just Theorem 7.11.
^
(b) Given x̃i ∈ P(H
i ) for i = 1, 2, let M(x̃1 , x̃2 ; {Hs , Js }) be the moduli
space of Floer solutions for the Floer data {Hs , Js } with x̃1 and x̃2
as asymptotes. For any element
u ∈ M(x̃1 , x̃2 ; {Hs , Js })

52

YOEL GROMAN

we have the a priori estimate
E(u) ≤ AH (x̃1 ) − AH (x̃2 ),
by Lemma 5.3 with F = Hs dt. By tameness it follows that
M(x̃1 , x̃2 ; {Hs , Js })
is compact. We define the continuation map by counting the 0dimensional moduli space. Since action decreases along continuation
maps, the finiteness condition is the same as the case of the differential. The fact that fI 12 is a chain map is the same as in the compact
case.
(c) It follows from tameness that all Floer solutions under a given energy
level for all the elements of the family are contained in an a priori
compact set. The claim thus follows from the compact case.

Proof of Theorem 2.1. This follows by Definition 7.3 from Theorems 7.4, 6.8
and 7.12 by passing to homology.

8. Reduced Hamiltonian Floer homology
8.1. Reduced homology.
Definition 8.1. We refer to a chain complex which is a topological vector
space with continuous differential as a topological complex. For a topological complex (C, d) the differential is in general not closed. To stay within
the realm of complete Hausdorff topological vector spaces we define the reduced cohomology of complete Hausdorff topological complexes(C, d) by
ker d
,
im d
where the over-line denotes the closure. For general C ∗ we first take the
Hausdorff completion and then take its reduced cohomology. Note that if
C ∗ is a Banach space then H(C, d) is itself a Banach space with the induced
quotient norm which is defined by
H(C, d) :=

k[a]k = inf kbk.
b∈[a]

For the ensuing discussion, we consider the vector space CF ∗ (H, J; K)
as a vector space over R, forgetting the action of the Novikov parameter.
∗
For a > 0 define CF(−∞,a)
(H; K) to be the R-sub-complex of CF ∗ (H; K)
∗ (H; K)
generated be periodic orbits of action less than a. Define by CF[a,b)
the quotient complex
∗
∗
∗
CF[a,b)
(H; K) := CF(−∞,b)
(H; K)/CF(−∞,a)
(H; K).
∗ (H; K) the corresponding cohomology groups. These are
Denote by HF[a,b)
vector spaces over R.

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

53

Theorem 8.2.
(a) A continuous chain map between topological complexes induces a well defined map on the reduced cohomologies.
(b) A nullhomotopic map induces the zero map on reduced cohomology.
Proof. For the first assertion, continuity implies that im d is mapped into
im d. For the second assertion, note that f maps all cycles into im d ⊂
im d.

Remark 8.3. A short exact sequence of topological complexes with continuous maps induces a long sequence of reduced cohomologies. However,
exactness of this sequence only holds under special assumptions.
Let C ∗ be a topological complex whose topology is induced by a filtration
by sub-complexes {Ct∗ }t∈R where Ct∗ ⊂ Ct∗0 whenever t < t0 . For any element
a ∈ C ∗ let val(a) := inf t a ∈ Ct∗ . Then val naturally induces a filtration on
∗
H (C ∗ ) defined by val([a]) = inf c∈[a] val c. Define now a filtration on the
vector space limt H ∗ (C ∗ /Ct∗ ) by
←−
(
!)


val(x) = inf t0 x ∈ ker lim H ∗ (C ∗ /Ct∗ ) → H ∗ (C ∗ /Ct∗0 )
,
←−
t

for x ∈ limt H ∗ (C ∗ /Ct∗ ). Observe that both spaces are complete
←−
to the norm kak := eval(a) , and are thus Banach spaces.

with respect

Theorem 8.4. We have
∗

H (C ∗ ) = lim H ∗ (C ∗ /Ct∗ ),
←−
t

as Banach spaces.
Proof. Any two cycles in the Hausdorff completion of C ∗ representing the
∗
same element in H (C ∗ ), represent the same element of H ∗ (C ∗ /Ct∗ ) for each
t. We thus get a well defined morphism
∗

f : H (C ∗ ) → lim H ∗ (C ∗ /Ct∗ ).
←−
t

C∗

If c ∈
is a cycle and f (c) = 0 then c is a boundary mod Ct∗ for each
t. In particular it is in the closure of the space of boundaries of C ∗ , so
[c] = 0 in the reduced homology. Thus f is injective. We now show that f
is surjective. Let a ∈ limt H ∗ (C ∗ /Ct∗ ). We can compute the inverse limit by
←−
taking subset {ti } of the index set R which is discrete, bounded above and
unbounded below. In this presentation, a is a sequence
(. . . , [ai ], [ai+1 ], . . . , [a0 ]),

[ai ] ∈ H ∗ (C ∗ /Ct∗i )

where [ai ] maps to [ai+1 ] under the natural map induced on homology. We
consider the representatives ai as living in C ∗ and claim that they can be
chosen so that already at the chain level, ai maps to ai+1 mod Ct∗i+1 . Inductively, suppose this holds for all i0 < i ≤ 0. We have that there is a bi0 ∈ C ∗
such that ai0 +1 − ai0 = dbi0 mod Ct∗i +1 . Replace ai0 by ai0 + dbi0 to get the
0

54

YOEL GROMAN

claim for i0 . The sequence {ai } converges as i → −∞ to an element â in
the completion of Ĉ ∗ . By construction, dâ = 0 and f ([â]) = a. Unwinding
definitions one verifies that f preserves the valuations and is thus a Banach
space isometry.

8.2. Floer cohomology of lower semi-continuous exhaustion functions.
Theorem 8.5. Let (H0 , J0 ) and (H1 , J1 ) be dissipative and such that for
some constant c we have H1 −c ≤ H0 ≤ H1 . Then the canonical continuation
∗
∗
map HF (H0 , J0 ) → HF (H1 , J1 ) decreases norms by a factor of at most
e−c . In particular, it is invertible. When H0 = H1 the continuation map is
an isometry.
Proof. Consider the composition of continuation maps
∗

∗

∗

HF (H0 , J0 ) → HF (H1 , J1 ) → HF (H0 + c, J0 ).
It is an isomorphism of linear vector spaces and scales the norm by e−c .
∗
∗
This shows that the map HF (H0 , J0 ) → HF (H1 , J1 ) is right invertible
and decreases norm by at most e−c . Left invertibility is shown similarly. 
Henceforth we drop J from the notation and talk about HF ∗ (H). Abusing notation we will also drop J from the chain level notation.
As a consequence of Theorem 8.5 we may extend the definition of Floer
homology to degenerate and even non-smooth dissipative Hamiltonians.
Namely, let Hn be a monotone increasing sequence of smooth non-degenerate
dissipative Hamiltonians converging uniformly in C 0 to a continuous Hamiltonian H. Define
∗
∗
HF (H) := lim HF (Hn ).
−→
∗
∗
Define a function on HF (H) by val(a) = inf val(ai ) where ai ∈ HF (Hi )
maps to a under the natural map.
Lemma 8.6. The function val is a non-Archimedean valuation and gives
∗
∗
rise to a complete norm on HF (H). The definition of HF (H) is independent of the choice of the Hi . Moreover, when H is smooth, dissipative and
∗
non-degenerate, the two definitions of HF (H) as a Banach space coincide.
Proof. By Theorem 8.5, the sequence val(ai ) is bounded below. Since it is
monotone decreasing, it is convergent. So,
ka + bk = lim kai + bi k ≤ lim max {kai k, kbi k} = max{kak, kbk}.
i

i

The other properties of the norm follow similarly, as does completeness. We
show independence of the choice of sequence Hn first for sequences such
that for each n there is a constant cn > 0 for which H − Hn > cn . Call
such a sequence admissible. Given any two sequences admissible sequences
we can squeeze a subsequence of one between a subsequence of the other.
∗
Thus, the definition of HF (H) is independent of the choice of admissible
sequence. Given any monotone sequence Hn converging uniformly to H, pick

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

55

a sequence Fnk approaching Hn with inequality Fnk ≤ Hn − clk ≤ H − clk .
By the above,we have
∗

∗

lim HF (Hn ) = lim lim HF (Fnk ).
−→
−→ −→
n

n

k

For any cofinal sequence Fnkn we have
∗

∗

lim lim HF (Fnk ) = lim HF (Fnkn ).
−→ −→
−→
n

n

k

The sequence Fnkn is admissible and converges uniformly to H. Thus we
get the independence of choices as required. When H is dissipative, consider
the sequence Hn = H − 1/n to show that the two definitions coincide. 
We show that the definition of action truncated Floer homology groups
also extends.
Lemma 8.7. For H and Hn as above,
∗
HF ∗[a,b) (H) = lim HF[a,b)
(Hn ).
−→
n

Caution: The claim does not necessarily hold if we consider other segments such as (a, b].
Proof. First note that the claim is true when Hn = H − cn for cn a sequence
of constants approaching 0. Given a monotone sequence of dissipative Gn
converging uniformly to H and satisfying
Gn ≤ H − ckn ,

(29)

we can squeeze in a subsequence of the Hn . So the claim is true for sequences
satisfying (29). Now suppose Fn is any monotone sequence approaching H.
Pick a sequence Gnk approaching Fn with inequality Gnk ≤ Fn − clk ≤
H − clk . By the above,we have
∗

∗

lim HF (Fn ) = lim lim HF (Gnk ).
−→ −→
−→
n

n

k

For any cofinal sequence Gnkn we have
∗

∗

lim lim HF (Gnk ) = lim HF (Gnkn ).
−→
−→ −→
n

n

k

The sequence Gnkn satisfies (29) and converges uniformly to H. The claim
follows.

The next theorem is key for what follows. It shows that truncated Floer
homology is continuous with respect to convergence on compact sets.
Theorem 8.8. Let {Hn } be a monotone increasing sequence of continuous
dissipative Hamiltonians converging pointwise to a continuous dissipative
Hamiltonian H. Then for any real a < b we have that the natural map
∗
∗
f : lim HF[a,b)
(Hn ) → HF[a,b)
(H),
−→
i

56

YOEL GROMAN

is an isomorphism.
Proof. Fix an almost complex structure J for which (H, J) and (Hi , J) are
dissipative. Without loss of generality we may assume that all the involved
Floer data are regular and non-degenerate. As in Lemma 8.7 we reduce to
the case where H −Hn ≥ cn > 0 for some cn > 0. By Dini’s Theorem, the Hi
converge to H uniformly on compact sets. By squeezing in an appropriate
sequence we may assume that there is an exhaustion of M by compact sets
Kn such that Hn = H − cn on Kn . For such a sequence we have that
for fixed real number E > 0 and compact set K, the numbers R(E, K) of
Theorem 6.3, defined for each of the Hn , stabilize as n → ∞. So, given an i
∗ (H ) there is a compact set K and an i > i such that
and a cycle γ ∈ CF[a,b)
i
0
∗
any continuation trajectory fi,i0 (γ) or fi (γ) is contained mod CF(−∞,a)
in
∗
∗
∗
0
K. Here fi : CF[a,b) (Hi , J) → CF[a,b) (H, J) and fi,i : CF[a,b) (Hi , J) →
∗ (H 0 , J) are the natural continuation maps. Indeed, since we are
CF[a,b)
i
considering only trajectories of energy less than b − a, Theorem 6.3 provides
an estimate on the diameter as required. The same claim holds for composite
trajectories of the form d ◦ fi,i0 and d ◦ fi etc.
Since Hi |Ki = H|Ki −ci , we may identify those periodic orbits of Hi which
are inside Ki with the periodic orbits of H in the same region. For each periodic orbit γ of H the corresponding periodic orbit of Hi is mapped mod a
by the continuation map to γ. Indeed, for i large enough, any continuation
trajectory emanating from γ and having energy at most b − a is contained
in Ki and so satisfies a translation invariant equation. To be rigid it must
be trivial. Moreover, taking i still larger, the same claim is true for the
periodic orbits appearing in the expansion of dγ mod i. This shows that f
is surjective. Injectivity follows in the same way. Namely, suppose there is
∗ (H) such that f (γ) = dδ mod a in CF ∗ (H). For i
an i and a δ ∈ CF[a,b]
i
large enough the same relation will hold in CF ∗ (Hi ).

Corollary 8.9. We have for any dissipative Hamiltonian and any sequence
Hi of dissipative Hamiltonians converging to H uniformly on compact sets,
∗

∗
HF (H) = lim lim HF[a,b)
(Hi ).
←− −→

(30)

a

b,i

∗

Moreover, we have for any α ∈ HF (H) that
(
(31)

val(α) = inf
a

!)

∗

∗
α ∈ ker HF (H) → lim HF[a,b)
(Hi )
−→
b,i

upgrading the isomorphism (30) to an isometry of Banach spaces.
Proof. We have by Theorem 8.8 and by exactness of the direct limit
(32)

∗
∗
∗
lim HF[a,b)
(Hi ) = lim HF[a,b)
(H) = HF[a,∞)
(H).
−→
−→
b,i

b

So, by Theorem 8.4 we obtain the isomorphism of Banach spaces.



FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

57

The last corollary allows to extend the definition of reduced Floer homology to arbitrary lower semi-continuous exhaustion functions. Namely, let
G ≤ H be dissipative. Such a G exists by Theorem 6.13. Pick an exhaustion {Ki } of M and let {Hi } be a monotone increasing sequence of smooth
non-degenerate Hamiltonians converging point-wise to H, equal to G outside
∗
of Ki , and satisfying H − Hi ≥ ci > 0. Define HF (H) by Equation (32)
with valuation given by the right hand side of (31).
∗

Lemma 8.10. HF (H) is independent of all the choices.
Proof. Consider the set H of all Hamiltonians which are bounded above by
H, coincide G at infinity and whose difference to H is bounded away from 0.
By lower semi-continuity and Dini’s Theorem, the sequence {Hi } is cofinal
in the sequence of all such Hamiltonians. Thus, in Equation (32) we get he
same result if we take the direct limit over all of H. Thus, the definition is
independent of all the choices excepting that of G. Consider now replacing G
by some Hamiltonian G0 and correspondingly replacing the {Hi } by {Hi0 }.
Then by Lemma 8.8 the truncated Floer homologies of each the Hi0 may
again be computed by an appropriate sequence of elements of H.

8.3. The chain level construction. We apply the telescope construction
∗
appearing in [3] to write HF (H), for general lower semi-continuous H, as
the cohomology of a certain complex. Namely, let (Hi , Ji ) be a sequence of
dissipative Floer data. Let q be a formal variable of degree −1 satisfying
q 2 = 0. Write10
∗
SC ∗ ({Hi }) := ⊕∞
i=1 CF (Hi )[q],
and equip it with the differential
δ(a + qb) := (−1)deg a da + (−1)deg b (qdb + κ(b) − b),
where κ denotes the continuation map CF ∗ (Hi ) → CF ∗ (Hi+1 ) for each i.
d∗ ({Hi }) denote the completion with respect to the action filtration.
Let SC
It is shown in [3] that, ignoring topology, there is a natural isomorphism
(33)

lim HF ∗ (Hi ) = H ∗ (SC ∗ ({Hi }), δ).
−→
i

This isomorphism arises as follows. Consider the underlying complexes
CF ∗ (Hi ) with differential δ(a) := (−1)deg a d(a). This change does not affect anything at the cohomology level, and continuation maps remain chain
maps. The obvious embeddings (CF ∗ (Hi ), δ) ,→ SC ∗ ({Hi }) commute up
to homotopy with the continuation maps thus giving rise to the map in
(33). For more details see [3]. Note that isomorphism (33) does not apply
to reduced cohomology. We will use it by applying it to truncated Floer
homology groups.
10As usual we abuse notation, omitting mention of the almost complex structures.

58

YOEL GROMAN

Theorem 8.11. Let H be a semi-continuous exhaustion and let (Hi1 , Ji1 )
and (Hi2 , Ji2 ) be monotone increasing sequences of dissipative Floer data such
d∗ ({H j }) are filthat for j = 1, 2, Hij converges to H pointwise. Then SC
i
tered quasi-isomorphic. If H is itself dissipative, they are both filtered quasid ∗ (H).
isomorphic to CF
The proof of Theorem 8.11 is carried out after establishing the following
few lemmas which are of importance in their own right.
Lemma 8.12. We have for any interval −∞ < a < b ≤ ∞,
 ∗

∗
d ({Hi }), δ = lim HF ∗ (Hi ).
H[a,b)
SC
[a,b)
−→
i

Further, we have an isometry of Banach spaces


∗ d∗
∗
(Hi ).
H SC
({Hi }), δ = lim lim HF[a,∞)
←− −→
a

i

where on the right hand side we define the norm by Equation (31) and on
the left hand side we take the norm induced from the CF ∗ (Hi ).
Proof. The first half of the claim is what is shown in [3] since no topology is
involved. For the second half, the isomorphism of topological vector spaces
follows from the first half and Lemma 8.4. The fact that this is an isometry
also follows from the first half by unwinding definitions.

Lemma 8.13. Let F 0 = {(Hi0 , Ji0 )}, F 1 = {(Hi1 , Ji1 )} be two monotone
sequences of dissipative Floer data such that Hi0 ≤ Hi1 . Let Hi,s be a monotone dissipative interpolating family. Then there is a filtration decreasing
continuation map
d∗ ({H 0 }) → SC
d∗ ({H 1 }),
φH : SC
i
i
inducing, for each interval [a, b), the canonical continuation map
∗
∗
lim HF[a,b)
(Hi0 ) → lim HF[a,b)
(Hi1 ).
−→
−→
i

i

H1 , H2

If
are two homotopies interpolating between F 0 and F 1 , there exists
a filtration decreasing chain homotopy operator
∗

d ({Hi0 }) → SC
d
K : SC

∗+1

({Hi1 })

such that
φH1 − φH2 = δ ◦ K + K ◦ δ.
Proof. Let ji : CF ∗ (Hi0 ) → CF ∗+1 (Hi1 ) be the chain homotopy operator
satisfying
fHi+1 ◦ κ − κ ◦ fHi = d ◦ ji + ji ◦ d.
Define
d∗ (F 0 ) → SC
d∗ (F 1 ),
φ : SC

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

59

by φ(a + qb) := f (a) + qf (b) + j(b). One verifies that this is indeed a chain
map. Inspecting isomorphism (33) one finds that the homology level square
∗ (H 0 )
lim HF[a,b)
i
−→

/ lim HF ∗ (H 1 )
i
[a,b)




/ H ∗ (SC ∗ ({H 1 }))
i
[a,b)

∗ (SC ∗ ({H 0 }))
H[a,b)
i

−→

commutes. This proves the first half of the claim. To define the chain homotopy operator K let li : CF ∗ (Hi1 ) → CF ∗+1 (Hi2 ) be the chain homotopy
operator associated to a family of homotopies interpolating between H1 and
n ◦ κ and κ ◦ f n for n = 1, 2. Let
H2 . Let jin be the homotopies between fi+1
i
2
mi : CF ∗ (Hi1 ) → CF ∗+2 (Hi+1
),

be a degree 2 operator satisfying
d ◦ m + m ◦ d = j 1 + κ ◦ l − (l ◦ κ + j 2 )
We show that such an m exists before proceeding. To see this note that each
term on the right hand side is a chain homotopy operator from κ◦f1 to f2 ◦κ
coming from appropriate 1-dimensional families of interpolating homotopies.
By standard Floer theoretic machinery, a generic two dimensional family
interpolating these 1-dimensional homotopies gives rise to an operator m as
required. By energy considerations, m is action decreasing.
Having established the existence of m we define the chain homotopy
K(a + qb) := (−)deg(a+1) l(a) + (−1)deg(b+1) (ql(b) + m(b)).
A straightforward but somewhat tedious calculation shows that K is indeed
a chain homotopy operator as required.

Proof of Theorem 8.11. We pick an exhaustion {Ki } on M . Let Gi =
min{Hi1 , Hi2 }. Let Hi3 be a non-degenerate dissipative Hamiltonian satisfying Hi3 ≤ Gi for all x ∈ M and Hi3 (x) ≥ Gi (x) − 1/i for x ∈ Ki . Such
a Hamiltonian exists by Lemma 6.13. The sequence Hi3 converges to H
uniformly on compact sets as do the sequence Hi1 and Hi2 . The first half of
the claim now follows from Lemmas 8.10, 8.12 and 8.13
For the second half, let H be dissipative. Let Hi = H for all i. One verifies
d∗ ({Hi }) induces an isomorphism
that any of the inclusions CF ∗ (H) ,→ SC
on the truncated homologies. Thus, CF ∗ (H) and SC ∗ ({Hi }) are reduced
quasi-isomorphic. The claim now follows from the first half.

Proof of Theorem 2.6. As in the discussion immediately following Lemma
6.13, we pick a monotone sequence Hi of dissipative Hamiltonians converging
∗
to H pointwise. For I ∈ I, we define HF I (H) be taking the truncated
homologies of SC ∗ ({Hi }). By Theorem 8.11 this is well defined and coincides
with the previous definition for dissipative Hamiltonians. The continuity

60

YOEL GROMAN

property follows from Lemma 8.12 and implies uniqueness at the homology
level. The functoriality follows from Lemma 8.13.

8.4. The product structure. In this section we wish to construct for any
pair of exhaustion functions H1 and H2 , a canonical bilinear map
∗

∗

∗

ˆ
HF (H1 )⊗HF
(H2 ) → HF (H1 + H2 ),
which is unital, associative and super-commutative. Our strategy is to define
the product directly, via counting pairs of pants, only after imposing severe
restrictions on the behavior of the Floer data near infinity 11. The need for
such restrictions arises because it is hard to construct a Floer datum on the
pair of pants satisfying the Poisson commutativity condition (14), or even its
weaker version (17), unless the Hamiltonians on the negative ends commute
with each other near infinity. For general Floer data, the product will be
constructed in the course of the proof of Theorem 1.3 via approximation on
compact sets by the techniques of the previous section. It is not hard to
see that any Floer datum on the pair of pants which satisfies the robustness
property mentioned in comment (g)(ii) at the end of §2.1 will give rise to
the same operation at the cohomology level. This robustness property can
be shown to hold for the pair of pants product as constructed in, e.g., [2]
for the cotangent bundle.
We will refer to families (Fs∈S = (Hs , Js )) satisfying the hypotheses of
Theorem 6.3 as dissipative families. When S consists of a single element,
we refer to it as a dissipative Floer datum. In the following, let Σ0,2,1 be
the thrice punctured genus 0 curve with one positive and two negative cylindrical ends. Fix a dissipative Floer datum (H, J) such that H is Lipschitz
with Lipschitz constant so small to be dissipative as in Theorem 6.8 and
have no periodic orbits outside of some compact set. Denote by F(H, J)
the set of all Floer data which coincide outside of some compact set with
(aH, J) where a ≤ 1. Call a 1-form α on Σ0,2,1 admissible if it can be
constructed as follows. Pick closed 1-form on Σ0,2,1 , coinciding with the
form dt on the negative ends and with the form 2dt on the positive end.
Abusing notation call the resulting form 2dt. Extend the s coordinate from
the cylindrical ends to a function on Σ0,2,1 such that ds ∧ dt ≥ 0 with respect to the complex structure on Σ0,2,1 12. Let α = f (s)dt with f monotone
increasing in s and f ≡ bi on the ith cylindrical end for some constants bi .
Call a Floer datum (H, J 0 ) on Σ0,2,1 admissible for (H, J) if there is an
admissible 1-form α on Σ0,2,1 for which H = α ⊗ H outside of a compact set,
and J 0 is quasi-isometric to J.
For i = 1, 2, 3, let (Hi , Ji ) ∈ F(H, J ). Suppose H3 ≥ H1 + H2 . Then
the following facts are standard and are stated without proof. There is an
(H, J)-admissible Floer datum on Σ0,2,1 which coincides with (Hi dt, Ji ) on
11The author is grateful to U. Varolgunes for pointing out an error ia a previous version

of the construction which imposed less restrictions.
12This can be achieved by taking a height function.

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

61

the ith cylindrical end. The set of all such Floer data is open in the C 0
topology on F(H, J). Moreover, any two such Floer data are connected by
a 1-dimensional family of (H, J)-admissible Floer data on Σ0,2,1 .
Lemma 8.14. An (H, J)-admissible Floer datum on Σ0,2,1 is dissipative.
The same is true for a 1-dimensional family of (H, J)-admissible Floer data
on Σ0,2,1 .
Proof. Write H = α ⊗ H. We need to verify the assumptions of Theorem
6.3. By construction, the ends are dissipative, so we need to verify only iboundedness on a complement of the ends. Let Σ0 ⊂ Σ0,2,1 be a complement
of the cylindrical ends such that dα is supported on Σ0 . We need to verify
that the Gromov metric gJH on Σ0 × M is i-bounded. Writing α = f (s)dt,
a computation shows the metric is then given by
gJH = gM + gΣ + f 2 kXH k2 dt2 + Hdf ∧ dt(·, jΣ ·).
p
At p ∈ Σ × M , this metric is CH(p) quasi-isometric to the geometrically
bounded metric gΣ × gJ , where C is an appropriate constant. Since H is
Lipschitz, it grows at most like the distance. So, equation (10) in Definition
4.1 will be satisfied if we pick Ki to be the ball of radius i around some point
p ∈ Σ × M , ai = a where a bounds the geometry of gJ × gΣ , and Ci to be
proportional to √1i . Allowing α to vary in a one dimensional family such that
dα remains compactly supported on Σ0 , the constant C above is uniform in
the family, and so the family is uniformly i-bounded as required.

Theorem 8.15. A generic admissible Floer datum determines a bilinear
map
∗
ˆ
∗ : CF ∗ (H1 , J1 )⊗CF
(H2 , J2 ) → CF ∗ (H3 , J3 ).
It satisfies d(x1 ∗ x2 ) = dx1 ∗ x2 + (−1)deg(x1 ) x1 ∗ dx2 and thus induces a map
∗

∗

∗

ˆ
HF [a1 ,b1 ) (H1 )⊗HF
[a2 ,b2 ) (H2 ) → HF [max{a1 +b2 ,a2 +b1 },b1 +b2 ) (H3 ).
The induced map on homology satisfies the following
(a) It is independent of the choice of Floer datum.
(b) It is super-commutative.
(c) It is associative. Namely, given H4 > H1 + H2 + H3 which are
all admissible then any way of combining a triple in HF ∗ (H1 ) ⊗
HF ∗ (H2 ) ⊗ HF ∗ (H3 ) using a composition of continuation maps and
the pair of pants product to produce an element of HF ∗ (H4 ) gives
rise to the same result.
Proof. Given generators γ˜i ∈ CF ∗ (Hi ) the pairs of pants of a fixed dissipative Floer datum with ith end asymptotic to γ̃i have energy estimated
according to Lemma 5.3 by E top (U ) which equals the action difference
AH3 (γ̃3 ) − AH1 (γ̃1 ) − AH2 (γ̃2 ). Theorem 6.3 thus implies that they are all
contained in a-priori compact set K depending on the differences bi − ai .
The claims are now the same as the closed case which is dealt with in the
a-spherical case in [28]. Sphere bubbling is treated in the exact same way

62

YOEL GROMAN

as for the differential, continuation maps and chain homotopy operators
which was done in detail in §7.2. The upshot is that in the semi-positive
case, whether one is working with a single Floer datum or with a family
of parametrized ones, spheres occur in codimension 4. All the arguments
involve at most 1-dimensional families of Floer solutions. Generically, there
is no sphere bubbling for such families.

Theorem 8.16. Let (Hj , Jj ), j = 0, 1 both be Floer data of small Lipschitz
constant at infinity. Given triples (Hij , Jij ), i = 1, 2, 3, j = 0, 1 of (Hj , Jj )admissible Floer data such that Hi0 ≤ Hi1 , the corresponding continuation
maps commute with the pair of pants product ∗.
Proof. By a standard argument, if H4 > H3 > H1 +H2 are (H, J) admissible,
the bilinear map ∗ : H1 ⊗ H2 → H4 factors through the continuation map
H3 → H4 . Let now bij be the constants such that Hij = bij Hj . By the
observation just made, we may assume bi0 = bi1 . This means we can take
the same 1-form α to construct a Floer datum H = α ⊗ Hj for j = 0, 1 in
defining the pair of pants product ∗.
As in the proof of Theorem 4.6, let V0 , V1 respectively be open sets supporting taming data for J0 and J1 respectively. Let Js be a uniformly ibounded family of almost complex structures interpolating between J0 and
J1 and with taming data supported on V0 for s ≤ 2/3 and on V1 for s ≥ 1/3.
Let f : R × M → [0, 1] be a smooth function which is monotone decreasing
in the first variable, equal to 1 on (−∞, 0] × M ∪ [0, 2/3] × V1 and to 0 on
[1/3, 1] × V2 ∪ [1, ∞) × M . For x ∈ M , let Hs (x) := f (s, x)H0 (x) + (1 −
f (s, x))H1 (x). Then the family gJHs is uniformly i-bounded and monotone
increasing in s. Let h : Σ0,2,1 → R be a smooth function which coincides
with the coordinate s on the ends. Define a family of Floer data on Σ0,2,1 ×R
by

Fz,σ := α ⊗ Hh(z−σ) , Jh(z−σ) ,
outside of a sufficiently large compact subset of M . The family is uniformly
i-bounded and interpolates between the required compositions.

Proof of Theorem 1.3. (a) First note that for fixed geometrically bounded
J and any H there is an H 0 < H with arbitrarily small Lipschitz constant
and Hessian. To see this, note that according to [30] there exists a function
and a point p ∈ M such that d(·, p) + 1 ≤ h ≤ d(·, p) + C, |∇f | ≤ C, and
| Hess f | ≤ C, where C depends only on n and K. As in Theorem 6.13
we can find a proper function f : R+ → R+ such that H 0 = f ◦ h ≤ H.
Moreover, f can be taken with arbitrarily small first and second derivative.
If H 0 has small enough gradient and Hessian, it will have no non-trivial periodic orbits. If it is time independent, the Floer differential will generically
consist of Morse gradient lines [14]. Similarly, the continuation solutions
will be accelerating Morse gradients. There is thus a final directed set of
∗
Hamiltonians H for which the HF (H) reduce to Morse cohomology with

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

63

the continuation maps reducing to isomorphisms. It follows that
∗

lim HF (H; K) = H ∗ (M ; K).
←−

H∈Hs.c.

(b) We first define the product. We do this at the homology level. Given
a pair Hi,1 , Hi,2 of monotone sequences of Hamiltonians which near infinity have small Lipschitz constant with respect to a fixed almost complex
structure we have for any pair of action windows [ai , bi ) a map
(34)
∗
lim HF[a∗ 1 ,b1 ) (Hi,1 )⊗lim HF[a∗ 2 ,b2 ) (Hi,2 ) → lim HF[max{a
(Hi,1 +Hi,2 )
1 +b2 ,a2 +b1 },b1 +b2 )
−→
−→
−→
i

i

i

Given an arbitrary pair of exhaustion Hamiltonians H1 , H2 pick monotone
sequences approximating H1 and H2 respectively and define the product on
∗
∗
ˆ
HF (H1 )⊗HF
(H2 ) using Corollary 8.9 by (34) and the obvious limiting
procedure. By Theorems 8.15 and 8.16, the above definition is independent
of all the choices and the product thus defined is associative and super
commutative. Unitality follows in the same way.

Proof of Theorem 1.4. (a) We have
K1 ⊂ K2 ⇐⇒ HK2 ≤ HK1 .
Thus there is a continuation map
∗

∗

SH ∗ (M |K2 ) = HF (HK2 ) → SH ∗ (M |K1 ) = HF (HK1 )
∗

(b) This is the symplectic invariance of the construction of HF .
(c) Pick a sequence Hi converging to HK . Then the sequence 2Hi also
converges to HK . Thus, the map
(35)

∗

∗

ˆ
∗ : HF (Hi )⊗HF
(Hi ) → HF (2Hi ),

induces a unital algebra structure as required.
(d) This is an immediate consequence of Theorem 1.3 and the functoriality
of the continuation maps.
(e) We have H − supK H ≤ HK . On the other hand the map corresponding
to H → H + c is a conformal isomorphism decreasing valuation by c.

8.5. Symplectic cohomology. Let I be an index set and let {Vi }i∈I be
a family of Non-Archimedean Banach spaces over K. The locally convex
direct sum of the Vi is the vector space ⊕i∈I Vi with the strongest locally
convex topology with respect to which all inclusion maps Vi0 → ⊕i∈I Vi
are continuous. This is the topology generated by convex absorbent sets
whose pre-image under each of the natural maps is a ball. A reference for
Non-Archimedean functional analysis is [27].

64

YOEL GROMAN

Definition 8.17. Let (M, ω) be geometrically bounded. Let H0 ⊂ H be a
semi-group. Define
∗

SH ∗ (M ; H0 ) := lim HF (H; ΛR ).
−→
H∈H0

The direct limit is taken in the category of locally convex non-archimedean
topological vector spaces. Namely, we take the locally convex direct sum
over H ∈ H0 and quotient by the subspace generated by all the relations
of the form x = fij (x) where i, j runs over elements of H0 and fij are the
d ∗ (M ; H0 ) the Hausdorff completion
continuation maps. We denote by SH
of SH ∗ (M ; H0 ) with respect to the locally convex topology. The space thus
obtained is a locally convex Hausdorff and complete vector space over ΛR .
Remark 8.18. Define the pre-order relation  by H1  H2 if and only if
there is a constant C such that H1 (x) ≤ H2 (x) + C for all x ∈ M . Given
a semi-group H0 , the (completed) symplectic cohomology can be computed
d ∗ (M ; H0 ) is Fréchet
by a direct limit over any -cofinal subset of H0 . SH
∗
if H0 admits a -cofinal sequence. If, moreover, dim HF (Hi ) < ∞, then,
by Lemma 8.20, SH ∗ (M ; H0 ) is already Hausdorff and in fact a Fréchet
ring. Examples where the assumption is satisfied includes the settings of
d ∗ (M ; H0 ) might
[35, 21, 24]. If H0 does not admit a -cofinal sequence, SH
be non-metrizable. In that case, the product induced by ∗ is continuous in
each variable but not necessarily jointly continuous. We remark also that
care must be taken when considering the completed direct limit which unlike
the ordinary direct limit is not an exact functor.
Lemma 8.19. Suppose H0 admits a -cofinal sequence {Hi } and let H ∈
∗
d ∗ (H0 )
H0 . An element x ∈ HF (H) maps to 0 under the natural map to SH
if and only if there is a sequence of numbers i satisfying Hi ≥ H and elements
∗
xi ∈ HF (H) converging to x and such that xi maps to 0 in HF ∗ (Hi ).
d ∗ (F) is Hausdorff and the continuation maps are continuous
Proof. Since SH
the ”if“ direction is obvious. Conversely, suppose x maps to 0. Then, since
the locally convex direct sum of a countable family of non-Archimedean
Banach spaces is Fréchet, x is in the sequential closure of the subspace
generated by all the relations of the form y = fij (y) in ⊕H 0 ∈F HF ∗ (H 0 ).
Without loss of generality assume H = H0 where 0 is a minimal index. So
there must be a sequence of elements xn ∈ HF ∗ (H0 ) and indices jn such
that the sequence xn −f0jn (xn ) converges to x. By passing to a subsequence,
we may reduce to the case where either jn = j or the case where jn 6= jm
whenever n 6= m. In the first case, the convergence is only possible if
xn → x and f0jn (xn ) → 0. So, continuity of the continuation map implies
that f0j (x) = 0. In the latter case we must have that for all but finitely
many n, we have fjn (xn ) = 0 in HF ∗ (Hjn ). Otherwise, by definition of
the locally convex direct sum, we could find an open set in ⊕H 0 ∈F HF ∗ (H)

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

65

containing x but not xn − f0jn (xn ) for an infinite number of n’s. Either way,
the claim follows.

Lemma 8.20. Under the hypothesis of Lemma 8.19, assume further that
∗
HF (H; ΛR ) is finite dimensional over ΛR then SH ∗ (M ; H0 ) is already
Hausdorff complete, and therefore Fréchet.
Proof. The kernel of the map
∗

∗

HF (Hi ) → lim HF (Hi ),
−→
is a linear subspace of a finite dimensional normed space. In particular, it
is closed. Thus, by Lemma 8.19, the natural map
∗
c HF ∗ (Hi )
lim HF (Hi ) → lim
−→
−→
∗
is injective. It follows is lim HF (Hi ) is Hausdorff. Completeness is stan−
→
∗
dard. Thus lim HF (Hi ) satisfies the universal property in the right cate−→
gory.

9. Computations and applications
9.1. Liouville domains. Let (Σ, α) be a contact manifold. Let (U, ω = dλ)
be a compact exact symplectic manifold with Σ as boundary such that
α = λ|∂U =Σ and such that the Liouville field Z, which is defined by ιZ ω = λ,
points outward at the boundary. Let M = Û be the completion of U by
attaching the cone Σ × R≥0 with the symplectic form ωα = er (dα + dr ∧ α).
Denote by L the set of Hamiltonians that are linear functions of er at infinity.
Let J be of contact type. As in [35], define SHV∗ iterbo (U ) = limL HF ∗ (H, J).
−→
∗
∗
Lemma 9.1. We have that SHV iterbo (U ) = SH (M ; L).
Proof. By Example 5.20, when paired with a contact type J, the elements
of L are i-bounded. Any H ∈ L with slope at infinity not in the period
∗
spectrum of Σ is dissipative by Example 6.18. It follows that HF (H) =
HF ∗ (H). So the directed systems computing each side coincide.

In particular, we have a natural map
∗
f : SHV∗ iterbo (U ; R) = SH ∗ (M ; L, R) → SHuniv
(M ; R).

Theorem 9.2. The map f is an isomorphism.
Remark 9.3. Note that the proof relies crucially on the fact that for convex Hamiltonians the action spectrum is bounded from below rendering the
topology discrete. This fails when working over a non-trivially valued field.
To see what sets trivially valued fields apart, consider the following. Given
two Hamiltonians H1 ≤ H2 such that Hi = hi (er ), the continuation map
fij : HF ∗ (H1 ; R) → HF ∗ (H2 ; R)
can be shown two be an isomorphism of linear vector spaces, and thus, since
the topology is discrete, of topological vector spaces. However the inverse

66

YOEL GROMAN

of fij will generally not be bounded. Thus when working over ΛR , the map
fij will no longer be homeomorphism.
Proof. The set of functions of the form H = h(er ) for h convex is cofinal.
Given such an h pick a sequence hi of convex functions converging to h on
compact subsets of R and such that near infinity hi is linear of slope not
∗
in the period spectrum. Let Hi = hi (er ). We have that HF[k,∞
(Hi ) =
)
∗
HF (Hi ) for all k ≤ 0 since the action of any periodic orbit is greater than
∗
∗
0. So, HF (H) = limi HF ∗ (Hi ) = limi HF (Hi ). The set Hi is cofinal in L
−→
−→
with respect to the order relation
H1 ≤ H2 ⇐⇒ ∀x ∈ M, H2 (x) − H1 (x) ≥ C > −∞.
Therefore, we obtain an isomorphism
∗

HF (H) = lim HF ∗ (Hi ) → SH ∗ (Lreg ; R).
−→
i

Moreover, given two convex functions h1 ≤ h2 , the continuation maps from
h1 (er ) to h2 (er ) will commute with the above isomorphisms since they are
all defined via continuation maps between functions which are linear near
infinity. The claim follows.

We have also proven the following.
Theorem 9.4. We have
SH ∗ (Û | Skel(U ); R) = SH ∗ (Û |U ; R)
∗
(Û ; R).
= SHV∗ iterbo (U ; R) = SHuniv

Proof.



Proof of Theorem 1.19. We consider the radial coordinate t = er which we
may assume surjects onto (0, 1), with Skel(U ) corresponding to t = 0. We
use the notation U (t0 ) to denote the t0 sublevel set of t. We will consider
a family of dissipative S-shaped Hamiltonians Hc, which are defined as
follows. H is equal to 0 on U (), to ct −  on U (1/2) \ U () and has small
gradient and Hessian outside U (1/2). Here it is understood that we perturb
slightly to get a smooth Hamiltonian which is transversely non-degenerate
on U (1/2). By part (c) of Theorem 2.1 the Hamiltonians Hc, are dissipative.
We construct a monotone increasing sequence ci going to ∞ and a monotone
decreasing sequence i going to 0 and such that the distance of ci to the
period spectrum of ∂U is more than 2i . We take i even smaller so that the
energy required according to Theorem 6.3 for a Floer trajectory to meet both
sides of U (1)\U (1/2) is more than i ci . Observe now that by our assumption,
the action functional on M restricted to loops in U which are contractible
in M coincides up to a constant with the action functional defined using the
Liouville form. Moreover, the periodic orbits outside of U (1/2) are constants
with large value of H. Thus, the set of periodic orbits of Hci ,i having nonnegative action are the constants inside U (i ) as well as the periodic orbits

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

67

appearing as the slope goes from 0 to ci . Their actions are all at most
ci δi . Thus, the Floer trajectories connecting orbits of non-negative action
∗
all remain inside U (1). So, SH[0,∞)
(M | Skel(U ); R) = SHV∗ iterbo (U ; R).
It remains to show that the negative action periodic orbits form an acyclic
complex. Consider an increasing 1-parameter family of Hamiltonians Ht =
Hc(t),(t) with c(t) → ∞ as t → ∞, and fix an action window [a, 0). We
∗ (H ) =
cannot show that for an arbitrary a there is a fixed t such that HF[a,0)
t
0 since as we increase the slope, new negative periodic orbits keep appearing
with action not far from 0. However, we can show that for each t0 there is a
t1 such that, denoting by ft0 ,t1 the continuation map from t0 to t1 , we have
∗
(Ht )) = {0}.
ft0 ,t1 (HF[a,0)

Indeed, let γ be a periodic orbit of ∂U with period T ≤ c(0). It will
appear as a periodic orbit of Hc(t),(t) of action T −c(t)
− (t). Consider the
2
cohomology class α(t) = f0,t (α). By functoriality of the continuation maps,
its action is a monotone decreasing function of t. Moreover, since for any
∗ (H ) is finitely generated, there is a discrete set of
t the complex CF[a,0)
t
points {ti ∈ [0, ∞)} such that on the interval
P i(ti , ti+1 ),i the cocycle α is
represented by the action minimizing cycle
γj . Let Tj be the period of
i
i
γj as a Reeb orbit of ∂U and let T be the maximal of these. Along the
i

− (t). Since the
interval (ti , ti+1 ) the action of α(t) will be given by T −c(t)
2
i
action of α(t) is non-increasing, we must have that T is nonincreasing. Since
c(t) → ∞ it follows that the negative periodic orbits in U (1) eventually fall
out of any action window under the continuation maps. The periodic orbits
outside of U (1) are constants with action going to negative infinity. This
means all the periodic orbits which lie outside U (1) are in the closure of the
boundary operator in SC ∗ ({Hi }). Upon tensoring SC ∗ ({Hi }) with ΛR the
same remains true.

Proof of Theorem 1.21. Let K be a compactly supported displacing Hamiltonian for Skel(U ). Then K displaces an open neighborhood of Skel(U )
which we may take to be U itself. Let F be a Hamiltonian which vanishes
on a neighborhood of U ∪supp K and has small enough gradient and Hessian
to be dissipative and have only critical points as periodic orbits. Let Hi be
a sequence of Hamiltonians which vanishes on Skel(U ), increases on U (i )
for some i → 0, and becomes a constant Ci outside the u(i ) with Ci → ∞.
The sequence Hi + F is dissipative and computes the local symplectic cohomology of U in M by the proof of Theorem 2.6.
Recall the notation H1 #H2 := H1 + H2 ◦ ψH1 where ψH is the time 1
Hamiltonian flow of H. We have ψH1 #H2 = ψH2 ◦ ψH1 . Observe that the
sequence (Hi + F )#K computes the local symplectic cohomology of U as a
topological vector space. To see this, note there is a constant C such that
|Hi #K − Hi | < C so we can factor
SC ∗ ({Hi + F − C}) → SC ∗ ({(Hi + F )#K} → SC ∗ ({Hi + F + C}),

68

YOEL GROMAN

and vice versa.
Note that F + K = F #K is also a displacing Hamiltonian which after slightly perturbing we can take to be non-degenerate. Moreover, all
the fixed points of (Hi + F )#K coincide with those of F #K. By a standard argument[31], adding Hi has the effect of shifting the action spectrum
by −Ci . The action spectrum of F #K is bounded from above since all
the positive action orbits lie in the compact set defined by F = 0. Thus
the whole action spectrum of (Hi + F )#K moves to negative infinity. So,
SH ∗ (M | Skel(U )) = 0. By Theorem 1.19, this implies SHV∗ iterbo (U ) = 0. 
Proof of Theorem 1.22. We consider the family of Hamiltonians Hc, as in
the proof of Theorem 1.19. The periodic orbits of U that are contractible in
U embed in an action preserving manner in LM . We take δ > 0 such that
any Floer trajectory of energy at most δ which meets U (1/2) is contained in
U (1). The classes [x, A] with x a contractible periodic orbit in U (1/2) and A
∗ ({H
a path in LU (1) ⊂ L(M ) thus form a direct summand of SC[0,δ)
ci ,o }).
Moreover, the proof of Theorem 1.19 shows that the differential applied to
contractible periodic orbits in U (1/2) coincides mod δ with the differential
computing SH ∗ (Û |U ). This proves the claim.

Proof of Theorem 1.23. Consider Hamiltonians as in the proof of Theorem 1.21
and denote by
f : SC ∗ ({Hi + F }) → SC ∗ ({(Hi + F )#K})
a continuation map induced by an appropriate homotopy, by g the continuation map in the other direction, and let H be the chain homotopy
operator between the identity and g ◦ f . Fix an action value a. By taking i0 large enough we have as in the proof of Theorem 1.21 fi vanishes
mod a for all i ≥ i0 . Therefore, starting our sequences at i0 , we have
Id = H ◦ d + d ◦ H mod c for all c ≥ a. But H can increase the valuation by
at most the Hofer norm of K. It follows that if val α = c > a and dα = 0
∗ (H ) has
mod c the largest possible window [c, d) for which α 6= 0 ∈ HF[c,d)
U
d − c < d(U ) ≤ kHkHof er . So taking a < 0 and δ as in Theorem 1.22 we get
d(e) > δ.

9.2. Mapping Tori. Let (M, ω) be a compact symplectic manifold and let
ψ : M → M be a symplectomorphism. Denote by Mψ the mapping torus
Mψ := [0, 1] × M/(0, p) ' (1, ψ(p)).
Let ω̃ be the 2-form on Mψi obtained by pulling back ω via projection to
M , and let
M̃ψ := R × Mψ ,
with the symplectic structure ω̃ + ds ∧ dt. Denote by HF ∗ (M, ψ) the fixed
point Floer homology of ψ as introduced in [9]. The natural 1-form induces
a grading on Hamiltonian Floer homologies. Given this grading we have

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

69

Denote by S : M̃ψ → R the natural coordinate (s, t, p) 7→ s. Let f : R →
R be a proper convex function which is linear at infinity of slope at greater
than k for some integer k. Let J be an almost complex structure for which
the map π : M̃ψ → R × S 1 defined by (s, t, p) 7→ (s, t) is J-holomorphic. Let
H = f ◦ S. The following Theorem is due to M. Abouzaid.
Theorem 9.5.
(36)

HF

∗,k

(H; ΛR ) ' HF ∗ (M, ψ k ; ΛR ),

where the ' denotes a conformal isomorphism.
Proof. The Hamiltonian vector field of S is ∂t . So, the periodic orbits of
H = f ◦ S are contained in fibers of H for which f 0 is an integer. The
periodic orbits corresponding to an integer k are the fixed points of ψ k . The
periodic orbits corresponding to different values of k have different homotopy
classes. Thus the Floer differential only connects orbits within a fiber.The
(H, J)-Floer in M̃ψ project under π to maps satisfying the inhomogeneous
Cauchy Riemann equation
∂s S = ∂t T − 1,

∂s T = ∂t S.

Thus the function s + it 7→ S + i(T − t) is holomorphic. By the maximum
principle, S must be constant. In particular, Floer trajectories connecting
orbits within a fiber of H must stay within that fiber. Also, we have T = t.
Recall the definition of the differential in fixed point Floer homology.
Namely, for fixed points x, y of ψ k it counts J-holomorphic strips asymptotic
to x, y satisfying the boundary condition u(s, 1) = ψ(u(s, 0)). Given such a
u we obtain a Floer cylinder ũ in the mapping torus by ũ(s, t) := (t, u(s, t)).
This sets up a bijection between the Floer trajectories connecting periodic
orbits in a fiber and fixed point holomorphic strips.

Proof of Theorem 1.11. Let f be any proper convex function and let H =
f ◦ S. Consider a monotone sequence of convex functions fn which are linear
of slope larger than k near infinity and which converge to f .
Since Floer trajectories remain in Fibers of S, we have by the isomorphism (36)
HF

∗,k

(H) = HF

∗,k

(Hn := fn ◦ S) = HF ∗ (M, ψ k ).

By the same reasoning, given convex function f1 ≤ f2 and denoting Hi =
∗,k
∗,k
fi ◦ S, i = 1, 2, we get that the natural map HF (H1 ) → HF (H2 ) is just
the identity under the above identification. It follows that
∗,k
SHuniv
(M̃ψ ) = HF ∗,k (M, ψ k ),

as topological vector spaces. Moreover, for each such H there is a continu∗
ˆ k∈Z HF ∗ (M, ψ k ). Indeed, the norm on HF ∗,k is the
ous map HF (H) → ⊕
product of the norm on HF ∗ (M, ψ k ) by eck where c = ksk − f (sk ) and sk
satisfies f 0 (sk ) = k. By convexity of f , ck increases with k, so the map
is indeed well defined and continuous. Moreover, it is a dense embedding.

70

YOEL GROMAN

d ∗ (M̃ψ ) → ⊕
ˆ k∈Z HF ∗ (M, ψ k ).
Thus there is an induced dense embedding SH
It remains to verify surjectivity. For thus it suffices to show that for each
Cauchy sequence in ⊕k∈Z HF ∗ (M, ψ k ) there is an H such that its pre-image
∗
in HF (H) is Cauchy. Equivalently, given a sequence in ⊕k∈Z HF ∗ (M, ψ k )
with valuation going to 0 we can find an H such that the pre-image in
∗
HF (H) has valuation going to 0. This is immediate from the description
above.

9.3. The Kunneth formula for split Hamiltonians. For i = 1, 2, let
Mi be symplectic manifolds and let (Hi , Ji ) be dissipative Floer data on Mi .
Unless (Hi , Ji ) are strictly bounded, the data (H1 ◦π1 +H2 ◦π2 , π1∗ J1 +π2∗ J2 )
will not be i-bounded. In that case we replace CF ∗ (H) via the telescope
construction by a sequence of Hamiltonians which are strictly bounded and
continue to denote this by CF ∗ (H). We have,
∗
d ∗ (H1 ◦ π1 + H2 ◦ π2 , π1∗ J1 + π2∗ J2 ) = CF ∗ (H1 , J1 )⊗CF
ˆ
(37) CF
(H2 , J2 ),

where the hat denotes here and later the complete tensor product. This is
defined by taking the Banach norm k · k on the tensor product X ⊗ Y to be
defined by


X
kzk := inf max{kxi kkyi k} : z =
xi ⊗ yi ,
z ∈ X ⊗ Y.
i

It is straightforward to verify using (28) that this is indeed the norm induced
by (37). The complete tensor product satisfies the universal property for
jointly continuous bilinear maps from X × Y to non-archimedean locally
convex topological vector spaces over R.
Theorem 9.6. We have a natural isometry of Banach spaces over ΛR ,
∗

∗

∗

ˆ
HF (H1 + H2 ; ΛR ) = HF (H1 ; ΛR )⊗HF
(H2 ; ΛR ).
Proof. We follow the proof of the finite dimensional case from [13]. Isomorphism (37) induces a norm preserving map
∗

∗

∗

∗

∗
ˆ
ˆ
HF (H1 )⊗HF
(H2 ) → H (CF ∗ (H1 )⊗CF
(H2 )) = HF (H1 + H2 ).

We show that this map is surjective. All the spaces considered here are of
countable type. In particular every closed subspace has a closed complement.
We thus decompose the chain complexes CF ∗ (Mi ; Hi ) into a direct sum
Ci ⊕ Zi of chains and cycles and then further decompose Zi = Ki ⊕ Bi where
Bi = ∂Ci .
∗ (H ) is up to the closure of the boundary
ˆ
Any cycle γ ∈ CF ∗ (H1 )⊗CF
2
an element of
ˆ 2 ⊕ K1 ⊗C
ˆ 2 ⊕ C1 ⊗K
ˆ 2 ⊕ K1 ⊗K
ˆ 2 ⊕ C1 ⊗C
ˆ 2.
B1 ⊗C
Now note the images of the spaces under ∂ are contained respectively in,
ˆ 2 , K1 ⊗B
ˆ 2 , B1 ⊗K
ˆ 2 , 0, B1 ⊗C
ˆ 2 ⊕ B2 ⊗C
ˆ 1,
B1 ⊗B

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

71

which are pairwise disjoint. So, each component of the boundary must
vanish separately. Thus if γ is a cycle it must actually be an element of
ˆ 2 up to the closure of the boundary. In particular, the map is indeed
K1 ⊗K
surjective.

9.4. The Kunneth formula for universal symplectic cohomology.
We shall need the following lemma. The author is grateful to Lev Buhovski
for its proof.
Lemma 9.7. Let M, N be smooth manifolds and let P = M × N . The set
of functions of the form f ◦ π1 + g ◦ π2 is cofinal in C ∞ (P ).
Proof. Take an exhaustion K1 ⊂ K2 ⊂ ... ⊂ M of M and an exhaustion
L1 ⊂ L2 ⊂ ... ⊂ N of N , by compact sets, and define positive locally
bounded functions g1 : M → R, g2 : N → R by g1 (x) = maxKi ×Li f
and g2 (y) = maxKr ×Lr f , where i is the minimal positive integer such that
x ∈ Ki , and r is the minimal positive integer such that y ∈ Lr . Then we have
f (x, y) 6 g1 (x) + g2 (y), for any (x, y) ∈ M × N . Now, since g1 and g2 are
locally bounded, one can find smooth functions f1 : M → R and f2 : N → R
such that g1 (x) 6 f1 (x) for any x ∈ M , and g2 (y) 6 f2 (y) for any y ∈ N ,
and then we have f (x, y) 6 f1 (x)f2 (y) for any (x, y) ∈ M × N .

We shall also need the following technical lemma.
Lemma 9.8. The injective tensor product and the reduced direct limit commute with each other.
Proof. The injective tensor product in a category C of topological vector
spaces is defined to be the unique up to isomorphism complete topological
vector space in the same category space which satisfies the universal property
of the tensor product with respect to bilinear maps which are separately
continuous with respect to each variable. Let {Ai }i∈I and {Bj }j∈J be a pair
of directed systems of objects in the category C with morphisms denoted by
ast : As → At , and buv : Bu → Bv whenever s ≤ t ∈ I and u ≤ r ∈ J. By the
universal property for the reduced direct limit, for a fixed object C ∈ C, a
system fij : Ai × Bj → C of separately continuous bilinear maps commuting
with the ast and buv induces a unique map limi∈I Ai × limj∈J Bj → C which
−→
−→
is bilinear and separately continuous. Thus, it induces a continuous map
ˆ  lim Bj → C.
lim Ai ⊗
−→
−→
i∈I

j∈J

Conversely, such a map defines a system of separately continuous bilinear
maps Ai × Bj by composing with the natural map
ˆ  lim Bj ,
lim Ai × lim Bj → lim Ai ⊗
−→
−→
−→
−→
i∈I

and the maps {ast }, {buv }.

j∈J

i∈I

j∈J



72

YOEL GROMAN

proof of Theorem 1.12. By Lemma 9.7 we can use split data to compute on
both sides of equation (3). So, by Theorem 9.6 we can write
d ∗univ (M1 × M2 ; ΛR ) =
SH

lim
−→

∗

∗

ˆ
HF (H1 ; ΛR )⊗HF
(H2 ; ΛR ).

(H1 ,H2 )∈A(M1 )×A(M2 )

Observe that for Banach spaces, which are a particular instance of Fréchet
spaces, the injective and projective tensor products coincide. So, the right
hand side of the last equation is
d ∗univ (M2 ).
d ∗univ (M1 )⊗
ˆ  SH
SH
This proves the claim.


∗

∗

d (M1 ) = 0. Then SH
d (M1 × M2 ) = 0.
Corollary 9.9. Suppose SH
9.5. Vanishing results.
Theorem 9.10. Let M be a geometrically bounded manifold such that c1 (M ) =
0. Suppose there exists a proper dissipative non-degenerate Hamiltonian on
d ∗univ (M ; K) = 0.
M carrying no periodic orbits of index 0. Then SH
∗

d (M ; K) factors
Proof. By definition, the natural map H ∗ (M ; K) → SH
∗
∗
through HF (M ; K). Since HF (H; K = 0), we get from Theorem 1.3
d ∗univ (M ; K) is a unital algebra in which 1 = 0.
that SH

Lemma 9.11. Let M be a geometrically bounded manifold such that c1 (M ) =
0. The hypotheses of Theorem 9.10 are satisfied if M carries a circle action
ψθ∈S 1 for which the following holds.
(a) It is generated by a Hamiltonian H which is proper and bounded from
below.
(b) There is an equivariant compatible geometrically bounded almost complex structure J such that the distance d(p, ψ1/2 (p)) under gJ is
bounded away from 0 outside of a compact set and such that kHkgJ ≤
f (H) for some tame function f .
Proof. Our assumptions imply that for any integer k, the function (k+1/2)H
is dissipative. Indeed invariance of J under the flow implies the flow of H is
Killing. Thus, by Corollary 5.12 and Lemma 5.10 the metric gJH is geometrically bounded. The estimate on d(p, ψ1/2 (p)) implies loopwise dissipativity
as in §6.5. Let P ⊂ M be a connected component of the set of critical points
of H. Then P is compact and Morse Bott. For p ∈ P , the Robin-Salamon
index iRS (p) with respect to the flow of 12 H is related to the Morse index by iRS (p) + 2iM orse (p) + dim P = 2n. Suppose first that iRS (p) 6= 0.
The Robin-Salamon index is additive with respect to concatenation and
invariant under reparametrization. Thus, the absolute value of the RobinSalamon index of the critical points p ∈ P can be made arbitrarily large
by multiplying H by a large enough constant. Suppose now iRS (p) = 0.
Then 0 ≤ iM orse (p) = n − dim P/2. By a standard construction we can
perturb P and obtain critical points with a range of indices ± dim P/2. We

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

73

have dim P < 2n since the action is non-trivial. So the range of indices
is in (−n, n). After shifting the Robin-Salamon by n to obtain the correct
grading (for which the unit has degree 0), we get that in either case for k
large enough, there are no periodic orbits of index 0.

Remark 9.12. Lemma 9.11 has the curious implication that on a closed
symplectic manifold M with c1 (M ) = 0 there are no Hamiltonian circle
actions. This is in fact proven in [22].
Example 9.13. Let M be a toric Calabi Yau manifold obtained as the symplectic reduction of CN by a torus preserving the holomorphic volume. Then
M has an induced almost complex structure which preserves the action of
the residual torus. With the induced Kahler metric, M can be shown to
have bounded geometry and the circle action given by the diagonal action
θ · [z1 , ..., zN ] = [eiθ z1 , ..., eiθ zN ],
can be shown to satisfy the conditions of Lemma 9.11.
9.6. Existence of periodic orbits.
Proof of Theorem 1.7. Let H : M → R be a proper smooth function such
that H −1 (−∞, 0) = K. Suppose there is a δ > 0 such that the flow of
H on H −1 (0, δ) has no periodic orbits representing α in the first part or
contractible in the second. We may assume without loss of generality that
H has sufficiently small Hessian everywhere so that the only periodic orbits
are critical points. Let hn : R → R be a monotone function constructed
inductively so that − n1 < hn (x) < 0 for x ∈ (−∞, a], hn (x) = x + n on
(a + δ/n, ∞) and hn (x) ≥ hn−1 (x) everywhere. Let Hn = hn ◦ H. Note
that by our assumption the only periodic orbits of Hn are critical points,
or, in the first part, periodic orbits not representing α. We have that Hn
converges in a monotone way to HK . So, by Lemma 8.12,
d∗ ({Hn }) = lim lim HF ∗ (Hn ; K).
SH ∗ (M |K; K) = SC
[a,∞)
←− −→
a

n

d∗,α ({Hn })
The first part of the theorem now follows since the complex SC
computing SH ∗,α (M |K) is the zero complex. We prove the second part.
∗ (H ; K)
We claim that for any n any −∞ < a < b, and any x ∈ HF[a,b)
n
0
supported on critical points lying outside of K, there is an n such that x 7→ 0
∗ (H 0 ; K). Indeed, if we choose sufficiently generic almost complex
in HF[a,b)
n
structures we may assume that the for any triple of integers m, n1 , n2 we
1
Hni or
have that the any simple Floer trajectory in the differential of m
1
1
∗
∗
in the continuation map CF ( m Hn1 ) → CF ( m Hn2 ) is of the expected
dimension. By a standard argument in Floer theory all the solutions are time
independent. Any such trajectory is gradient like for H, so if it emanates
from a critical point outside of K it remains outside of K. Moreover, the
action difference is just the difference in the value of H which is at least
∗ (H ; K).
n2 −n1 . Thus, if n2 −n1 > val(x)−a then x will map to 0 in HF[a,b)
n2

74

YOEL GROMAN

By similar reasoning, if x is supported in K, it will map to itself under the
obvious identification of critical points of Hni with those of H. The claim
follows.

Proof of Theorem 1.13(a). Let H be a Hamiltonian with a gap near H −1 (0)
by subtracting a small enough constant we may assume that the gap is of the
of form (0, δ). Let Hn be any Hamiltonian as in the proof of the Theorem 1.7.
∗
d ∗univ (M |K) does not vanish. Considering the
Then the map HF (H) → SH
commutative triangle
HF ∗ (Hn )


d ∗ (M )
SH
univ

'
/ SH ∗ (M |K)

we obtain the claim.



The proof of part (b) of Theorem 1.13 relies on the following lemma.
Lemma 9.14. Under the assumption of Theorem 1.13(b) we have that for
any smooth J-proper Hamiltonian H : M → R+ there is an a ∈ R+ such
that the set of x ∈ [a, ∞) for which H −1 (x) has a periodic orbit representing
α is dense in [a, ∞).
Proof. Suppose otherwise. Then there is a monotone increasing unbounded
sequence {ai } such that for x ∈ (a2i , a2i+1 ) the flow of H has no periodic
orbits representing α. Fix a geometrically bounded almost complex structure J. For any R > 0 we may assume without loss of generality that
BR (H −1 (a2i−1 )) ⊂ H −1 (a2i ). Fix a constant  and consider the set E of
functions h : R+ → R+ such that k∇h ◦ Hk <  outside of the segments
(a2i , a2i+1 ). Then the set {h ◦ H|h ∈ E} is -cofinal in H. Taking R large
enough and epsilon small enough, the Floer data (h ◦ H, J) will be dissipative by Corollary 6.11. Moreover, these compositions have no periodic orbits
representing α. Thus SH ∗,α (M ) = 0 contradicting the assumption.

Proof of Theorem 1.13(b). Suppose otherwise. Then for any K there is
a proper Hamiltonian H and real numbers 0 < a < b such that K ⊂
H −1 ([0, a]) and there are no periodic orbits in the interval (a, b). Inductively
choose an exhaustion by compact sets Ki , and exhaustion Hamiltonians Hi
with gaps (ai , bi ) such that for all i we have
Ki ⊂ H −1 ([0, ai ]) ⊂ H −1 ([0, bi ]) ⊂ Ki+1 ,
and
ai < bi < ai+1 .
Let H be any proper Hamiltonian which coincides with Hi on Hi−1 ([ai , bi ])
and satisfies
bi < H(x) < ai+1 ,

FLOER THEORY AND REDUCED COHOMOLOGY ON OPEN MANIFOLDS

75

on the region
{Hi (x) > bi } ∩ {Hi+1 < ai+1 }.
By taking a subsequence, we can assume further that H is J-proper. There
is no a > 0 for which H satisfies nearby existence on [a, ∞) in contradiction
to Lemma 9.14.

References
[1] A. Abbondandolo and M. Schwarz, On the Floer homology of cotangent bundles,
Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics 59 (2006), no. 2, 254–316.
[2] M. Abouzaid, Symplectic cohomology and Viterbo’s theorem, Free loop spaces in geometry and topology, IRMA Lect. Math. Theor. Phys., vol. 24, Eur. Math. Soc.,
Zürich, 2015, pp. 271–485.
[3] M. Abouzaid and P. Seidel, An open string analogue of viterbo functoriality, Geometry
& Topology 14 (2010), no. 2, 627–718.
[4] Y. V. Chekanov et al., Lagrangian intersections, symplectic energy, and areas of
holomorphic curves, Duke Mathematical Journal 95 (1998), no. 1, 213–226.
[5] K. Cieliebak, A. Floer, and H. Hofer, Symplectic homology. II. A general construction,
Math. Z. 218 (1995), no. 1, 103–122, doi:10.1007/BF02571891.
[6] K. Cieliebak and Y. Eliashberg, From Stein to Weinstein and back, American Mathematical Society Colloquium Publications, vol. 59, American Mathematical Society,
Providence, RI, 2012, Symplectic geometry of affine complex manifolds.
[7] K. Cieliebak, U. Frauenfelder, and G. P. Paternain, Symplectic topology of Mañés
critical values, Geometry & Topology 14 (2010), no. 3, 1765–1870.
[8] K. Cieliebak, V. L. Ginzburg, and E. Kerman, Symplectic homology and periodic
orbits near symplectic submanifolds, Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici 79 (2004),
no. 3, 554–581.
[9] S. Dostoglou and D. A. Salamon, Self-dual instantons and holomorphic curves, Annals
of Mathematics 139 (1994), no. 3, 581–640.
[10] O. Fabert, Contact homology of Hamiltonian mapping tori, Commentarii Mathematici
Helvetici 85 (2010), no. 1, 203–241.
[11] A. Floer, Symplectic fixed points and holomorphic spheres, Communications in Mathematical Physics 120 (1989), no. 4, 575–611.
[12] R. E. Greene and H. Wu, C ∞ approximations of convex, subharmonic, and plurisubharmonic functions, Annales Scientifiques de l’École Normale Supérieure, vol. 12,
1979, pp. 47–84.
[13] P. Griffiths and J. Harris, Principles of algebraic geometry, John Wiley & Sons, 2014.
[14] H. Hofer and D. A. Salamon, Floer homology and Novikov rings, The Floer memorial
volume, Springer, 1995, pp. 483–524.
[15] J. Kang, Symplectic homology of displaceable Liouville domains and leafwise intersection points, Geometriae Dedicata 1 (2014), no. 170, 135–142.
[16] H. Karcher, Riemannian comparison constructions, Global differential geometry,
MAA Stud. Math., vol. 27, Math. Assoc. America, Washington, DC, 1989, pp. 170–
222.
[17] G. Lu, Virtual moduli cycles and Gromov-Witten invariants of noncompact symplectic manifolds, Comm. Math. Phys. 261 (2006), no. 1, 43–131, doi:10.1007/
s00220-005-1393-7.
[18] D. McDuff and D. Salamon, J-holomorphic curves and symplectic topology, American Mathematical Society Colloquium Publications, vol. 52, American Mathematical
Society, Providence, RI, 2004.
[19] A. Nabutovsky, Disconnectedness of sublevel sets of some Riemannian functionals,
Geometric & Functional Analysis GAFA 6 (1996), no. 4, 703–725.

76

YOEL GROMAN

[20] A. Oancea, A survey of Floer homology for manifolds with contact type boundary or
symplectic homology, Symplectic geometry and Floer homology. A survey of the Floer
homology for manifolds with contact type boundary or symplectic homology, Ensaios
Mat., vol. 7, Soc. Brasil. Mat., Rio de Janeiro, 2004, pp. 51–91.
[21]
, The Künneth formula in Floer homology for manifolds with restricted
contact type boundary, Math. Ann. 334 (2006), no. 1, 65–89, doi:10.1007/
s00208-005-0700-0.
[22] K. Ono, Some remarks on group actions in symplectic geometry, J. Fac. Sci. Univ.
Tokyo Sect. IA Math. 35 (1988), no. 3, 431–437.
[23] P. Petersen, Riemannian geometry, second ed., Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol.
171, Springer, New York, 2006.
[24] A. F. Ritter, Deformations of symplectic cohomology and exact Lagrangians in ALE
spaces, Geometric and Functional Analysis 20 (2010), no. 3, 779–816.
[25]
, Topological quantum field theory structure on symplectic cohomology, Journal
of Topology 6 (2013), no. 2, 391–489.
[26] D. Salamon, Lectures on floer homology, Symplectic geometry and topology (Park
City, UT, 1997) 7 (1999), 143–229.
[27] P. Schneider, Nonarchimedean functional analysis, Springer Monographs in Mathematics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2002, doi:10.1007/978-3-662-04728-6.
[28] M. Schwarz, Cohomology operations from S1 -cobordisms in Floer homology, Ph.D.
thesis, 1995, available at http://www.math.uni-leipzig.de/~schwarz/diss.pdf.
[29] J.-C. Sikorav, Some properties of holomorphic curves in almost complex manifolds,
Holomorphic curves in symplectic geometry, Progr. Math., vol. 117, Birkhäuser,
Basel, 1994, pp. 165–189.
[30] L.-F. Tam, Exhaustion functions on complete manifolds, Recent advances in geometric
analysis, Adv. Lect. Math. (ALM), vol. 11, Int. Press, Somerville, MA, 2010, pp. 211–
215.
[31] M. Usher, The sharp energy-capacity inequality, Communications in Contemporary
Mathematics 12 (2010), no. 03, 457–473.
, Boundary depth in Floer theory and its applications to Hamiltonian dynamics
[32]
and coisotropic submanifolds, Israel Journal of Mathematics 184 (2011), no. 1, 1–57.
[33] M. Usher and J. Zhang, Persistent homology and Floer–Novikov theory, Geometry &
Topology 20 (2016), no. 6, 3333–3430.
[34] S. Venkatesh, Rabinowitz Floer homology and mirror symmetry, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1705.00032 (2017).
[35] C. Viterbo, Functors and computations in Floer homology with applications. I, Geom.
Funct. Anal. 9 (1999), no. 5, 985–1033, doi:10.1007/s000390050106.

Department of Mathematics
Columbia University,
2990 Broadway,
New York, NY 10027

