arXiv:1606.07679v1 [math.AG] 24 Jun 2016

A Semi-Smooth Kodaira Vanishing Theorem and
Demi-Normal Cyclic Covering Lemma
Jeremy Berquist
September 24, 2018

Abstract. The classical Kodaira Vanishing Theorem states that H i (X, ωX ⊗
L) = 0 for i > 0, where X is a smooth projective variety over C and L is an
ample line bundle on X. We prove an analogous vanishing result under the
assumption that X is a semi-smooth projective variety over C. This is done by
passing to the normalization of X, which is a smooth projective variety when
X is semi-smooth. The classical vanishing result is proved using a cyclic cover.
Therefore we include a proof that the cyclic cover of a demi-normal variety is
again demi-normal.

1

Contents
1 Introduction

3

2 Main Result

4

3 Cyclic Covering Lemma

6

2

1

Introduction

The Kodaira Vanishing Theorem is used in birational geometry in order to
prove (among other things) the Cone Theorem of the Minimal Model Program
(MMP). See [4] Section 2.4 for the statement of the theorem and discussion on
its proof. Vanishing results are often useful when studying global properties of
algebraic varieties. Within the context of the MMP, it becomes important to
study singular varieties, even when the data that begin the program are smooth
varieties. In particular, it becomes necessary to work also with non-normal
varieties.
The non-normal varieties that arise in the context of the MMP are the
demi-normal varieties. These are varieties X with Serre’s S2 property, such
that the codimension one part has only double normal crossing singularities.
Equivalently, X is S2 , Gorenstein in codimension one (G1 ), and seminormal
(SN). See [3]. The appropriate way to study the singularities on X is to use a
semi-resolution of X, in the same way that a resolution of singularities is a tool
to study the singularities of a normal variety.
A semi-resolution f : Y → X is a proper, birational morphism, such that the
only singularities on Y are double normal crossings and pinch points. (These are
desribed algebraically as points whose local rings have completions isomorphic to
k[[x1 , . . . , xn ]]/(x1 x2 ) for double normal crossing points and k[[x1 , . . . , xn ]]/(x21 −
x22 x3 ) for pinch points. We also require that a semi-resolution be such that f
sends the singular locus of Y birationally onto the singular locus of X in an
open set where the only singularities are double normal crossings. In particular,
no component of the singular locus of Y is f -exceptional.) A variety Y with
these singularities is called semi-smooth.
The normalization p : Y → Y of a semi-smooth variety Y is smooth. Moreover, the conductor loci, given by C in Y and by D in Y , are such that C and
D are both smooth, and C → D is a smooth morphism of degree two, ramified
along the pinch locus. Whenever we have a finite morphism such as p, ample
line bundles pull back to ample line bundles. Moreover, there is a simple relationship between the dualizing sheaves on Y and Y (note that Y has only
hypersurface singularities, and is therefore Gorenstein, so its dualizing sheaf is
invertible): p∗ ωY = ωY (C).
It seems natural then that a vanishing result should hold for Y when a
similar result holds for its normalization. Our main result is the following (2.1):
Given a semi-smooth variety projective variety X over C, and an ample line
bundle L on X, the higher cohomology H i (X, ωX ⊗ L) = 0 for i > 0. note that
Serre duality holds for X, so an equivalent statement is that H i (X, L−1 ) = 0
for i < dim X.
The proof of the Kodaira Vanishing Theorem uses cyclic covers. Although
we do not duplicate the proof here by substituting “semi-smooth” for “smooth”
at the appropriate places (a method that is not sure to work), but instead pass
to the normalization and use the statement of the theorem for smooth varieties,
it seems appropriate to discuss cyclic covers in the demi-normal case. This we
do after proving the main result. In particular, we show that a cyclic cover of a
3

demi-normal variety is again demi-normal. In principle, such a result allows us
to, for example, replace a Q-Gorenstein (Cohen-Macaulay) demi-normal variety
with its index-1 cover, and thus to assume the Gorenstein condition. We have
yet to find a use for such a trick in birational geometry, because the cover thus
constructed is not birational to the variety we start with. However, its existence
does suggest that Kodaira vanishing in the semi-smooth case should be a natural
consequence of vanishing in the smooth case.

2

Main Result

Let X be a semi-smooth projective variety over C. Let p : X → X be the
normalization, so that X is smooth. Note that the normalization of a projective
variety is projective. If the conductor loci are denoted by C ֒→ X and D ֒→ X,
then the induced morphism C → D is a (smooth and finite) morphism between
smooth varieties, of generic degree two. In particular, the trace map provides a
splitting
OD → p∗ OC → OD .
We use this fact by applying cohomology functors to OC and OD in what follows.
We have the following short exact sequences: (*)
0 → OX (−D) → OX → OD → 0
and similarly for the ideal sheaf of C, noting that p is finite, (**)
0 → p∗ OX (−C) → p∗ OX → p∗ OC → 0.
Now the conductor ideal sheaf is by definition the largest such ideal sheaf in OX
that is already an ideal sheaf in OX . Hence the first terms in these sequences
are isomorphic. Moreover, there is a commutative diagram of exact sequences
sending the first into the second.
Now let L be an ample line bundle on X. Then p∗ L is ample. We have
by duality that p∗ ωX = ωX (C). We apply Kodaira vanishing. It states that
H i (X, p∗ ωX (−C) ⊗ p∗ L) = 0 for i > 0. Since p is finite, there are no nonzero
higher direct images, and the Leray spectral sequence shows that
0 = H i (X, p∗ (p∗ ωX (−C) ⊗ p∗ L)) = H i (X, ωX ⊗ L ⊗ p∗ OX (−C))
for i > 0, where we’ve used the projection formula in the second equality.
In other words, when we tensor the sequence (**) by ωX ⊗ L and take the
long exact sequence in cohomology, we have isomorphisms for all i > 0:
H i (X, p∗ OX ⊗ ωX ⊗ L) ∼
= H i (X, p∗ OC ⊗ ωX ⊗ L).
But the first term in (*) is isomophic to the first term in (**), so we conclude
that we also have isomorphisms in cohomology from tensoring (*) with ωX ⊗ L.

4

Since there is a morphism of short exact sequences, as mentioned above, we
obtain the following commutative diagram for all i > 0:
H i (X, ωX ⊗ L)


y

∼
=

−−−−→ H i (X, ωX ⊗ L ⊗ OD )


y
∼
=

H i (X, p∗ OX ⊗ ωX ⊗ L) −−−−→ H i (p∗ OC ⊗ ωX ⊗ L)
The second vertical arrow splits, since there are maps OD → p∗ OC → OD
whose composition is the identity. Tensoring and applying H i are functorial, so
we obtain the splitting as required. In particular, the first vertical arrow also
has a splitting map, meaning that the following composition is the identity:
H i (X, ωX ⊗ L) → H i (X, p∗ OX ⊗ ωX ⊗ L) → H i (X, ωX ⊗ L).
Thus it suffices to show that the middle term is zero for i > 0.
We have
H i (X, p∗ OX ⊗ ωX ⊗ L) = H i (X, p∗ (p∗ ωX ⊗ p∗ L)),
by the projection formula, which since p is finite equals
H i (X, p∗ ωX ⊗ p∗ L) = H i (X, OX (C) ⊗ ωX ⊗ p∗ L),
where we’ve again used duality. Thus we are done if we can show that this last
term is zero.
Consider the exact sequence
0 → OX → OX (C) → OC (C) → 0.
If we tensor by ωX , adjunction implies that the final nonzero term is ωC . Then
when we tensor by p∗ L, we have
0 → ωX ⊗ p∗ L → OX (C) ⊗ ωX ⊗ p∗ L → ωC ⊗ p∗ L → 0.
We want to show that the higher cohomology of the middle term vanishes. But
this follows from the long exact sequence in cohomology and Kodaira vanishing
for the smooth varieties X and C.
We have therefore proved:
Theorem 2.1. Let X be a projective semi-smooth variety over C. Then
H i (X, ωX ⊗ L) = 0
for i > 0 and any ample line bundle L on X.

5

3

Cyclic Covering Lemma

In this section we show that a cyclic cover of a demi-normal variety is again
demi-normal. The relevance for the present situation is that Kodaira vanishing
uses the cyclic covering trick. Since a similar vanishing theorem holds in the
non-normal situation, it seems appropriate that such a covering should be deminormal.
Lemma 3.1. The property that a finite morphism is étale is local on the base.
In other words, a finite morphism f : Y → X is étale if and only if there is a
covering of X by affine open sets U such that f |f −1 U : f −1 U → U is étale.
Proof. By definition, f is étale if and only if f is flat and ΩY /X = 0. By
construction of the relative cotangent bundle, we have ΩY /X |f −1 U ∼
= Ωf −1 U/U
−1
for affine open sets U . Note that f U is also affine in this case. That f is flat
if and only if f |f −1 U is flat for all U in an open covering of X follows directly
from the definition. The lemma follows from these two observations.
Proposition 3.2. Let X be a Q-Gorenstein variety with properties G1 , S2 , and
seminormality. There exists a finite cover π : Y → X in which Y has the same
properties, the morphism π is étale over the locus where KX is Cartier, and
KY = π ∗ KX is a Cartier divisor on Y . If Y is Cohen-Macaulay, then it is
Gorenstein.
Proof. Let m be an integer such that mKX is Cartier. For each open set where
⊗m ∨∨
(ωX
)
(corresponding to mKX ) is trivial, we choose a generating section
s : OX → OX (mKX ). Then we construct the sheaf of OX -algebras
A = OX ⊕ OX (KX ) ⊕ · · · ⊕ OX ((m − 1)KX ),
with multiplication defined by s:
OX (aKX ) ⊗ OX (bKX ) → OX ((a + b)KX )
if a + b < m, or
s−1

OX (aKX ) ⊗ (bKX ) → OX ((a + b)KX ) → OX ((a + b − m)KX )
if a + b ≥ m. Then consider the natural morphism π : Y = SpecX A → X.
If this is done for each set in an open cover on which mKX is trivial, then
we claim that the relative spectra and their projections patch together to give
a finite morphism onto X. The required properties of Y are all local, and
being étale is local on the base by (3.1). Thus we may assume that s : OX →
OX (mKX ) is a nowhere vanishing section giving a trivialization of mKX .
To prove the claim, recall that we are working over an algebraically closed
field of characteristic zero. Then the construction above is independent of the
choice of generating section, up to isomorphism.

6

The divisor π ∗ KX is Cartier. Suppose without loss of generality that KX is
effective (multiplying by an invertible sheaf does not change invertibility properties). Then the inclusion maps OX ((i − 1)KX ) ֒→ OX (iKX ), together with
the isomorphism s−1 : OX (mKX ) → OX , defines an A-linear map g : A → A
such that g m is the local equation of π ∗ (mKX ). (An R-linear map from a ring
R to itself is completely determined by where it sends 1. In this case, the identity is (1, 0, . . . , 0). Multiplication in R corresponds to composition of maps.)
Then g can be thought of as a section of OY , and π ∗ KX is the Cartier divisor
given by g. In other words, the rational function g defines an invertible subsheaf of KY , generated by the same element everywhere. Thus π ∗ KX , defined
1 ∗
as m
π (mKX ), is equal to the divisor determined by g.
If OX (KX ) is invertible, then locally on X it is generated by a single rational
function. Thus over an affine chart Spec(B), Y is given by the spectrum of
C = B[y]/(y m − s), where (by slight abuse of notation) s ∈ B is a unit. The
extension B → C is flat since it is free, and étale because the cotangent bundle
can be seen to be zero. For this, consider the exact sequence
δ

I/I 2 → ΩB[y]/B ⊗B[y] C → ΩC/B → 0.
Let s′ be an inverse of s in B. Then we have
δ(

s′
s′ y
s′ y
· (y m − s)) = (y m − s)dy ⊗ 1 +
· my m−1 dy ⊗ 1.
m
m
m

Since we can move everything in the tensors but the dy to the right, we see that
we get dy ⊗ s′ y m ≡ dy ⊗ 1 in the image of δ. This element generates the second
term in the above sequence, so by exactness we conclude that ΩC/B = 0. Again
since étaleness is local, π is étale over the open set where KX is Cartier.
In particular, π is étale over an open set U ⊂ X whose complement has
codimension at least two. Since π is finite, the preimage π −1 U also has a
complement with codimension at least two. It follows that KY and π ∗ KX agree
in codimension one (since the relative cotangent bundle is zero there), and hence
must be equal. Thus KY is a Cartier divisor.
The morphism π is such that π∗ OY = A. The summands of A are S2 , being
divisorial sheaves, hence so is their sum. Then Y is also S2 . We claim that at
every point y ∈ π −1 U , the local ring OY,y is Gorenstein and seminormal. In fact,
we may choose U so that all the local rings at points of U are Gorenstein and
seminormal. For any étale morphism, the completions of corresponding local
rings differ only by a separable field extension: Ôx ⊗k(x) k(y) ∼
= Ôy . A local ring
is Gorenstein if and only if so is its completion. See [2] 3.1.19. By [3] 5.3, the
same statement is true when the property is seminormality. Finally, tensoring
by a separable field extension of the residue field does not change either one of
these properties. For seminormality, this is shown in [3] 5.7. For the Gorenstein
property, this follows from the Ext definition, along with the fact that change
of fields defines an exact functor.
Thus Y has G1 and S2 and is seminormal in codimension one. By [3] 2.7,
the S2 condition implies that Y is seminormal everywhere.
7

We note that being Gorenstein is the same as having an invertible dualizing
sheaf and being Cohen-Macaulay. We can always conclude that KY is invertible,
but we need to assume that Y is Cohen-Macaulay before concluding that it is
Gorenstein. If all of the sheaves in π∗ OY are Cohen-Macaulay, then so is Y .
See [4], 5.4. However, even if X itself is Cohen-Macaulay, it is not clear that the
summands in π∗ OY will be Cohen-Macaulay. It seems the best result in this
direction that we can prove is that X is Cohen-Macaulay if Y is. This follows
from the splitting OX → π∗ OY → OX and the fact that Cohen-Macaulayness
can be checked by the vanishing of local cohomology modules.
We note that at least one other vanishing result for normal varieties and their
resolutions holds for demi-normal varieties and their semi-resolutions. Namely,
Grauert-Riemenschneider vanishing. As proved in [1], for a semi-resolution f :
Y → X of a demi-normal variety X, the higher direct images Ri f∗ ωY are zero.
This result is related to Kodaira vanishing in the normal case, via [4] 2.68.

References
[1] J. Berquist. On Semi-Rational Singularities, arxiv:1408.5835. 2014.
[2] W. Bruns and J. Herzog. Cohen-Macaulay Rings. Cambridge University
Press, 1998.
[3] S. Greco and C. Traverso. On Seminormal Schemes. Compositio Mathematica, 40:325–365, 1980.
[4] J. Kollár and S. Mori. Birational Geometry of Algebraic Varieties, volume
134 of Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, 1998.

8

