arXiv:1609.09672v2 [math.GT] 9 May 2017

Hyperbolic volume estimates
via train tracks

Antonio De Capua
Merton College
University of Oxford

A thesis submitted for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
Trinity 2016

Statement of Originality

I declare that the work in this thesis is, to the best of my knowledge,
original and my own work, except where otherwise indicated, cited, or
commonly known. Much the external material employed is adapted from
[MM00], [MM04], [Mos03] and, above all, [MMS12]. Roughly, the said
material is concentrated as follows:
• Chapter 1, §2.1, §2.2, and §2.3 include a large amount of previously
existing definitions and fundamental results: their sources will be
stated more or less individually;
• part of §2.4.5 is inspired by an original idea found in [MM04];
• §2.5.2 revisits an argument introduced in [MMS12] in a different setting;
• the applications described in §3.2 are based on technical tools introduced in [DW07].
This thesis has not been submitted for a degree at another university.

Antonio De Capua
Oxford, 1 September 2016

Acknowledgements
I am deeply grateful to Prof. Marc Lackenby for having been an exceptional supervisor. I greatly appreciate how, back when I had just begun my DPhil, he took care
of orienting me across the research environment at Oxford, and made sure that my
background was solid enough before I started any research. During these years he has
promptly aided me when I have been in need for new ideas, or hints, to carry on my
work; and assisted me in the key steps of my course. On the other hand, his balanced
supervision has been crucial for me to start learning how to carry out independent
research.
I wish to thank all the people with whom I have had profitable conversations for my
work and understanding of the topic, including my viva examiners: Saul Schleimer and
Panos Papazoglou; people I met at academic events: Bert Wiest, Jeffrey Brock, Ian
Agol, Javier Aramayona; my examiners in occasion of my Transfer and Confirmation
of Status: Martin Bridson and Cornelia Drutu; and anyone who have contributed
to broadening my horizons. Thanks to Prof. Minhyong Kim for being my advisor
at Merton College. Also, I am very indebted to Prof. Bruno Martelli, for giving me
the opportunity to speak in my old university, and to Prof. Roberto Frigerio, who
has been my supervisor at the time of my Bachelor and left me enthusiastic about
low-dimensional topology.
It has been an honor for me to collaborate with Professors Alexander Ritter,
Ulrike Tillman, and the already mentioned Papazoglou, Lackenby, and Drutu in undergraduate teaching. My teaching experience at Exeter College with the latter has
been particularly rewarding and educational for me, and I am looking forward to
starting my job as a Lecturer there in few weeks.
I am grateful to Merton College and to the Mathematical Institute for having
been two enviable environments where to work and spend my everyday life in Oxford:
thanks to their staff, for their professionalism, their time and effort. Moreover, I wish
to acknowledge the irreplaceable financial support of the Scatcherd European Fund,
along with the aforementioned institutions.

Abstract
We give a method of computing distances between certain points in the pants graph of
a surface S, up to multiplicative and additive constants. More precisely, we consider
splitting sequences of train tracks on S, such that the vertex set of each track in the
sequence subdivides S into pieces which are pairs of pants, or simpler than that. It is
possible to regard the sequence given by the vertex set of each track as a path along
the edges of a graph, which is naturally quasi-isometric to the pants graph of S: and
we show how to estimate the distance between two points along this path.
The present work is inspired by a result of Masur, Mosher and Schleimer according
to which, if the vertex sets along a splitting sequence fill S, then they give a quasigeodesic path in the marking graph; and the distance between the extremes of this
path is given, up to constants, by the number of splits occurring in the sequence.
However, their result cannot hold for the pants graph: it may well be that a high
number of splits in the splitting sequence make the vertex sets span a high distance in
some annular projection; and, despite this, these sets cover no similarly high distances
in the pants graph.
We work to treat this discrepancy: we describe a machinery that, given a train
track splitting sequence, produces first a new one where the moves only contributing
to annular distance are grouped altogether; and then a further one, the untwisted
sequence. This latter sequence resembles the former, but the distance it spans in any
annular subsurface projection is controlled by the pants graph distance. After these
constructions, we prove a distance formula by showing that the untwisted sequence
is suitable for application of the same arguments conceived by Masur, Mosher and
Schleimer.
Thanks to a result of J.F. Brock, our distance estimates in the pants graph reflect
into hyperbolic volume estimates for pseudo-Anosov mapping tori. We give a couple
of results in this area: the first one uses I. Agol’s maximal splitting sequence, the
second one revisits I. Dynnikov and B. Wiest’s interval identifications systems and
their transmission to give an estimate of the hyperbolic volume for a solid torus minus
a closed braid. We also sketch how one may regard this latter result as independent
of the train track machinery.

Contents
Preface

1

1 Background

7

1.1

1.2

1.3

Essentials on surfaces and 3-manifolds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

1.1.1

Surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

1.1.2 Hyperbolic 3-manifolds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Graphs attached to a surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10
11

1.2.1

Coarse geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

1.2.2

The curve complex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

1.2.3
1.2.4

Pants and marking graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The quasi-pants graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15
17

Hyperbolic volume estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20

1.3.1
1.4

3

Links complements in S , and the guts approach . . . . . . . .

20

1.3.2 Mapping tori, and pants distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The role of train tracks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21
23

2 Train tracks and pants distance
2.1

2.2

2.3

25

Train tracks: basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

2.1.1
2.1.2

Definition. Tie neighbourhoods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Carrying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25
30

2.1.3

More about tracks and curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

35

2.1.4

Elementary moves

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

37

Train tracks: more constructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.1 Lifting and inducing an almost track . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

41
41

2.2.2

Multiple moves specified by an arc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

55

2.2.3

Cornerization of train tracks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

60

2.2.4 Diagonal extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Good behaviour of splitting sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

69
72

vii

2.4

2.5

All about twist curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

75

2.4.1

Terminology and basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

75

2.4.2
2.4.3

Splitting sequences seen at a twist curve . . . . . . . . . . . .
The wide arc set at a twist curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

82
93

2.4.4

Twist split grouping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105

2.4.5

A bound on the number of highly twisting curves . . . . . . . 119

Untwisted sequences. Proof of the main statement . . . . . . . . . . . 141
2.5.1 The untwisted sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
2.5.2

Proof of the main statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152

3 Hyperbolic volume estimates
3.1
3.2

165

Pseudo-Anosov mapping tori . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
Braids in the solid torus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
3.2.1

Strip decompositions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172

3.2.2

Strip decompositions turn into train tracks . . . . . . . . . . . 175

3.2.3

Bounds without train tracks (sketch) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179

Bibliography

185

Last edit on 4th September 2018
viii

Preface
Possibly the most interesting questions related to the topology and geometry of surfaces are the ones arising when looking for bonds among geometric properties of the
many spaces and groups which may be associated to a surface. In particular one may
think of the Teichmüller space (with either the Teichmüller or the Weil-Petersson
metric), the mapping class group, and a number of graphs: the curve graph, the arc
graph, the pants graph and the marking graph. A summary of the network of natural
maps and quasi-isometries between these objects may be found in [Duc07], for instance. As this network of maps helps understanding one object’s geometry through
another one, the mentioned graphs give combinatorial, more manageable models for
the Teichmüller space and the mapping class group. The pants graph, in particular,
has been shown by J. Brock ([Bro03a]) to be quasi-isometric to the Teichmüller space
with the Weil-Petersson metric.
In the setting described above train tracks, introduced by W.P. Thurston, have
been employed for several steps towards a concrete comprehension of the surfacerelated graphs. A train track on a surface is a 1-complex which, just like a railway
network, may be travelled smoothly in infinitely many different ways, making different
choices when a switch is met. Travelling along a train track one may describe loops,
or infinite paths with bounded curvature which can be straightened to geodesics. The
simplest loops one may describe when travelling along a train track are finitely many,
and they are called vertex cycles.
When a train track is repeatedly altered via elementary moves to get a so-called
splitting sequence, the change produced on the set of vertex cycles seems to ‘proceed
towards a definite direction’ in the surface-related graphs listed above. While a summary of the results in this area is given in §1.4, there in one in particular, Theorem
6.1 in [MMS12], which motivates this work (here it is stated imprecisely):
Theorem. Given a splitting sequence τ of train tracks on a surface S, whose vertex
sets fill S, each of these sets is a vertex of M(S), the marking graph of S. There

1

is a constant Q = Q(S) such that the sequence of vertex sets of tracks in τ moves
along a Q-quasi-geodesic in M(S).
The definition of marking graph used in [MMS12] is not the most common definition, to be found in [MM00], but it gives a quasi-isometric graph, and is fitted for
families of curves arising as vertex sets. We may apply a similar trick for the pants
graph P(S), so that the vertex sets of a large family of train tracks are vertices of this
quasi-isometric, different version of P(S): we denote it P+ (S). Actually, the vertices
of P(S) will inject to the vertices of P+ (S).
One may think, then, that a similar result as the one above may hold in P+ (S).
But there must be some phenomenon which obstruct the vertex sets along a train
track splitting sequence from giving a quasi-geodesic in this graph.
The key to understanding this obstruction is the hierarchy machinery, and Theorem 6.12 in particular, of [MM00]. It applies for estimating distances both in the
pants graph and in the marking graph of a fixed surface S; however, while distances
in the marking graph are estimated via a summation over all distances induced in
the curve complexes of subsurfaces of S, including annuli, annuli are to be excluded
when estimating distances in the pants graph.
This gap between the two summations suggests that, in order to generalize the
result from [MMS12] to a statement valid for the pants graph, one has to control the
contribution given by annuli in the summation. This is the idea behind the main
theorem of this work i.e. Theorem 2.3.1, here stated in a simplified way:
Theorem. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a splitting sequence of train tracks with their vertex sets
V (τj ) ∈ P+ (S) for all 0 ≤ j ≤ N . Then there is a number A > 1, depending on S,
such that
1
|U(Rτ )| − A ≤ dP+ (S) (V (τ0 ), V (τN )) ≤ A|U(Rτ )| + A.
A
In this theorem, R and U are operations which turn a splitting sequence into a
new one, and | · | denotes the number of elementary moves which are splits (i.e. the
non-invertible kind of elementary move). Loosely speaking, the difference between
Rτ and τ is that the elementary moves are performed in a different order: this way,
every time there is annulus in S such that τ spans a high distance in the annulus’
curve complex, in Rτ this distance appears as the result of a splitting sequence which
realizes a series of many Dehn twists in a row.
U(Rτ ) is obtained from Rτ via removal of the majority of these Dehn twists,
in such a way that a splitting sequence is obtained anyway. This operation kills all
2

overly high annulus contributions in the summation of Theorem 6.12 of [MM00] but
produces a new splitting sequence which retains several properties of the old one.
Not only is our theorem similar in spirit to the aforementioned one from [MMS12]
but, once the operations R and U are defined, it may be proved using essentially the
same line of proof. A major adaptation is necessary as the proof in [MMS12] makes
use of local finiteness in M(S), while neither P(S) nor P+ (S) has this property;
however, our sequence U(Rτ ) has the property that, if a subsequence of it gives
bounded distance in P+ (S), it gives bounded distance in M+ (S), too: this is the aim
of our constructions.
It must be stressed that the three steps necessary to get the pants distance — i.e.
R, U and | · | — may be computed algorithmically from τ using the definitions and
proofs included in this work. So we give an effective way to compute the distance
covered in the pants graph by a splitting sequence. More generally, given any two
vertices of P(S), one may always define a splitting sequence whose endpoints in P+ (S)
lie close to the selected vertices.
This way, the machinery in this work will be useful to get distances in the WeilPetersson metric, too, as noted above; but we do not develop this aspect. We consider,
instead, an application of the above for computation of volumes of hyperbolic 3manifolds. According to a theorem proven in [Bro03b], the hyperbolic volume of a
mapping torus over a surface S, defined by a pseudo-Anosov ψ : S → S, is given (up
to constants) by the minimum displacement induced in P(S) by ψ.
Although that result requires extracting the minimum displacement, which is a
hard operation in general, it is possible to derive a couple of interesting corollaries from
our machinery: a step towards effective computation of volume of hyperbolic mapping
tori. In [Ago11], given ψ, a standard method is described to get an infinite splitting
sequence which is ‘preperiodic up to application of ψ’, i.e. it may be subdivided into
a ‘preperiod’ followed by chunks of equal length, such that all entries in a given chunk
are obtained from the previous one applying ψ. In Theorem 3.1.2 we prove that the
‘period’ ρ in this sequence is a splitting sequence such that the distance in P+ (S)
between its extremes is close to the requested minimum. So the hyperbolic volume of
the mapping torus is, up to additive and multiplicative constants, given by |U(Rρ)|.
We also sketch a way of estimating hyperbolic volume for complements of closed
braids in a solid torus, which are a special case of mapping tori. In this case there
is another splitting sequence to be considered, the one deriving from the trasmission
and relaxing technique for interval identification systems, as defined in [DW07]. We
explain briefly that their formalism is equivalent to train tracks except that, in order
3

to compute pants distance, no rearrangement operation on the same line as R is
needed; and we give a few considerations about how hyperbolic volume relates with
this formalism.
An outline of the contents of this work follows.
Chapter 1 traces the background the present work is built on. After giving some
definitions about surfaces and 3-manifolds, aimed mainly at fixing the most basic
terminology, in §1.2 we sum up all that is necessary to know about the curve graph,
the marking graph and the pants graph. In particular we describe what is a subsurface
projection and we give the statement of Theorem 6.12 of [MM00]. The section also
includes some original work, as we define P+ (S) and prove that it is quasi-isometric
to P(S).
In §1.3 we outline some previous work about estimates of hyperbolic 3-volume. In
particular we focus on the guts approach by Agol, and on the way it reflects on the
volume estimates for link complements found by Lackenby and by Futer–Kalfagianni–
Purcell. Then we switch to the setting of mapping tori, and give the full statement
of the volume estimate in terms of distance in the pants graph, as found by Brock.
Finally, in 1.4 we give a very short outline of the results about surface-related graphs
which involve train tracks.
Chapter 2 is concerned with the main content of this work: the proof of Theorem
2.3.1. After giving the basic definitions about train tracks, carried curves, and elementary moves, in §2.2 we give some more involved, but still general constructions.
The first one is a ‘subsurface projection’ for train tracks, the induction as defined
in [MMS12]. We also prove a list many basic properties of induced train tracks, in
particular the ones induced on an annular subsurface. The second construction is
a different viewpoint on elementary moves: an elementary move may be considered
as the result of cutting the track open along a zipper. This viewpoint will be convenient to describe a number of rearrangement procedures of elementary moves. In
the third subsection we explain how to reduce train tracks to the kind treated in
[MMS12], where each connected component of the track complement has a boundary
with a corner on each component. In the fourth subsection we recover some lemmas
concerning diagonal extensions of train tracks from the work of Masur and Minsky,
revisiting them in terms of almost tracks or induced train tracks, according to our
needs.
Once all the necessary terminology is given, in §2.3 we list the results about train
tracks and geodicity of splitting sequences in the curve graph and in the marking
graph, which are relevant to the present work.
4

In §2.4 we perform a deep analysis of twist curves, in order to define the rearrangement R. We have already mentioned before that, given a splitting sequence τ , and
the collections V (τj ) of vertex sets for each track in the sequence, we wish to control
the growth of dX (V (τj ), V (τj 0 )) for X ⊂ S an annulus. It turns out that this distance
may be high only if the core curve γ of X is a twist curve at some point of the splitting sequence. We consider twist curves as curves that, move after move, are able to
produce high powers of a Dehn twist (or of a Dehn twist inverse). However, the moves
producing these Dehn twists may be very sparse along τ , so it is convenient, for us to
have a control on them, to group them consecutively. This requires a fair amount of
work, because it is necessary to analyse minutely all the possible dynamics a splitting
sequence may show around γ. In particular we set up some conventions to avoid the
ambiguities caused by having every elementary move defined only up to isotopies.
Then we show that twist moves are determined by twist modelling functions, and
we analyze how the evolution of τ causes a movement in C(X), the annulus’ ‘curve
complex’, which proceeds always in the same direction, when γ is a twist curve.
We define the rotation number to quantify ‘the number of entire Dehn twists
taking place about a twist curve’, however sparse they may be, and finally we give a
procedure to concentrate almost all the rotation number in a chunk of the splitting
sequence where nothing occurs but Dehn twists about γ. We then define Rτ applying
this procedure to all annuli X which show a high distance dX (V (τ0 ), V (τN )) between
the extremes of the splitting sequence.
The last subsection bounds the number of these annuli in terms of the pants
distance covered by the splitting sequence. It is inspired by an idea employed in
[MM04]. This bound is necessary only as a technical step, because Theorem 2.3.1
would result into a better (linear) bound as an immediate corollary.
In §2.5 we introduce the untwisted sequence U(Rτ ): the idea in its definition is
that it shall closely mimic Rτ , except that the chunks of sequence expressing Dehn
twists will have a capped length. The splitting sequences U(Rτ ) and Rτ begin
with the same track and end with different ones; however, we prove that they share
several properties, and the distances they cover in P+ (S) are bounded in terms of one
another. Crucially, U(Rτ ) covers distances in M+ (S) which are bounded in terms of
the ones covered in P+ (S).
This allows us to proceed to the proof of Theorem 2.3.1: in general we need to
subdivide a splitting sequence τ into chunks such that each vertex set fills the same
subsurface of S. Then, with an interplay between Rτ and U(Rτ ), we are finally able
to revisit the proof of Theorem 6.1 in [MMS12] to suit the pants graph setting.
5

In Chapter 3 we connect Theorem 6.1 with the problem of estimating the hyperbolic volume of mapping tori. We first prove Theorem 3.1.2 about Agol’s maximal
splitting sequence, as mentioned before; then, in §3.2, we turn to the simpler case
of punctured discs, and mapping tori which may be described as the complement
of a closed braid in a solid torus. We describe how to turn Dynnikov and Wiest’s
transmissions of interval identification systems into a train track splitting sequence
and prove Corollaries 3.2.3 about pants distance and 3.2.4 about hyperbolic volume.
Then we sketch some further properties, including Proposition 3.2.10, which is a
volume formula in terms of words in the braid group Bn under a suitable generating
set, and of which David Futer has an independent proof.

6

Chapter 1
Background
1.1
1.1.1

Essentials on surfaces and 3-manifolds
Surfaces

These lines are conceived to fix once and for all the most basic objects treated in
this work. When the term is used with no specification, a surface S is an oriented,
connected, differentiable 2-manifold, possibly non-compact, without boundary unless
otherwise specified. Even when any of these implicit specifications is not met (and in
that case we will always make it explicit), the 2-manifolds we deal with are always
of finite type, i.e. homeomorphic to a compact 2-manifold (possibly) with boundary,
(possibly) with finitely many points removed (from its interior, if it has any boundary). For a surface S with no extra specifications, we also require that the complexity
ξ(S) := 3(genus − 1) + (#punctures) is ≥ 1.
Definition 1.1.1. Let M be an orientable, connected, finite-type, smooth n-manifold
(n ≥ 2), with no boundary. A hyperbolic structure on M is an atlas of charts φi :
Ui → Hn , where each Ui ⊆ M is an open subset, such that each change of chart
φj ◦ φ−1
: φi (Ui ∩ Uj ) → φj (Ui ∩ Uj ) is the restriction of an element of Isom+ (Hn ).
i
This atlas is also required to cover the whole M , and to be maximal.
Any surface will be understood to be endowed with a complete hyperbolic metric,
not necessarily with finite area, which makes it isometric to the quotient H2 /Γ for a
subgroup Γ < Isom+ (H2 ), Γ ∼
= π1 (S), acting freely and properly discontinuously. A
puncture, in this work, shall be considered as a purely topological concept, unrelated
with the hyperbolic metric. Given a surface S and one of its punctures, we say that
S has a cusp there if the puncture has a neighbourhood with finite area. Note that

7

the area of S is infinite if and only if S has a puncture which is not a cusp: then we
say that S has a funnel at that puncture.
By curve on a surface S we mean an embedding S1 ,→ S which, unless otherwise
specified, is defined only up to isotopies. A curve is essential if it can be homotoped
neither into a disc, nor into a peripheral annulus. A multicurve is a collection of
pairwise disjoint and non-isotopic essential curves: it is a well-known fact that a
multicurve comprises at most ξ(S) different curves.
Given any two essential curves α1 , α2 on a surface S, their intersection number
i(α1 , α2 ) is the minimum number of intersection points between α1 , α2 attained when
deforming both curves within their respective isotopy classes — if α1 , α2 are isotopic,
then i(α1 , α2 ) = 0. If A1 , A2 are two finite collections of essential curves on S, then
P
i(A1 , A2 ) := α1 ∈A1 ,α2 ∈A2 i(α1 , α2 ).
Given S a surface, a subsurface X is either the entire S or a connected 2-submanifold
with boundary, of finite type, with the following requests:
• each puncture of X is also a puncture of S;
• ∂X consists of a collection of components of ∂S and smooth essential curves in
S;
• int(X) is not homemorphic to a pair of pants S0,3 .
Note that this definition of subsurface includes closed annuli and complements of open
annuli in S, as their boundary contains a pair of isotopic curves in S. In general, we
allow two components of ∂X to be isotopic curves (but, even in this case, we assume
that distinct components have distinct realizations in S).
Subsurfaces, similarly as curves, are to be considered up to isotopies in S. In a
few occasion we will drop the connectedness condition, and in those cases we make
this explicit.
In sections 8.1–8.3, [TM79], the limit set LΓ ⊆ ∂H2 of Γ is defined; together with
the domain of discontinuity DΓ := ∂H2 \LΓ . Define the convex core of S as core(S) :=
H(LΓ )/Γ, where H(LΓ ) is the convex hull of LΓ in H2 . It is a hyperbolic surface with
totally geodesic boundary, and finite area. Also, define the funnel compactification
of S as the quotient S̄ := (H2 ∪ DΓ )/Γ. Since it is shown that the action of Γ on
H2 ∪ DΓ is free and properly discontinuous (Proposition 8.2.3 in the cited work), S̄
is a surface, with boundary unless S̄ = S. Note that S̄ may still have punctures (the
cusps of S), so it is not compact in general.
There is a natural diffeomorphism r : S̄ → core(S), isotopic to idS̄ . It restricts
to a diffeomorphism S → int (core(S)). Both S̄, core(S) are not compact in general

8

because they add a circular boundary to a given puncture of S only if all its neighbourhoods have infinite area — or, equivalently, if S has a closed geodesic encircling
the puncture; again equivalently, if and only if the puncture cannot be identified with
the quotient of a point in LΓ (a parabolic one).
A peripheral annulus of S is a 2-submanifold diffeomorphic to S1 × [0, 1), bounded
by an inessential curve, which serves as a closed neighbourhood for a puncture of S.
It is not a subsurface of S.
The definition of S̄ depends, even topologically, on the hyperbolic metric on S.
The compactification of S, instead, is taken to be a compact surface with boundary
S• := S \ int(P ), where P is a collection of disjoint peripheral annuli, one for each
topological puncture of S. In particular, when a topological puncture is a funnel for
the hyperbolic metric, one can choose a peripheral annulus bounded by an inessential
closed geodesic: with this choice we get ∂core(S) ⊆ ∂S• . So, S• is a compact surface
with boundary where ‘each puncture of S is turned into a boundary component’. It
is possible to identify r• : S → int(S• ) via a diffeomorphism, homotopic to idS . No
preferred metric is to be considered on S• .
A (properly embedded) arc on S is a smooth embedding ρ : [0, 1] ,→ S• , with
ρ−1 (∂S• ) = {0, 1}; an arc is essential if no homotopy relative to ∂S• turns it into
a point, or a path contained in ∂S• . We identify arcs with their restriction in S;
more precisely, we identify ρ with r•−1 ◦ ρ|(0,1) : (0, 1) → S. Similarly as curves, arcs
are usually considered to be defined up to isotopies relative to ∂S• . A collection of
pairwise disjoint and non-isotopic (rel. ∂S• ) arcs in S• (which is the same as saying,
in S), consists of at most 3|χ(S)| arcs (see Remark 1.1 in [Prz15]).
With an abuse of notation, sometimes subsurfaces X will be identified with the
corresponding int(X). A distinction between the two concepts will be done only when
it is relevant and not self-evident.
Note that, for X a subsurface of S, the natural map π1 (X) → π1 (S) is an injection.
If S ∼
= H2 /Γ, let ΓX < Γ be the subgroup which is identified with π1 (X) under the
isomorphism π1 (S) ∼
= Γ, and denote S X := H2 /ΓX , which is clearly a covering space
for S: it is a surface if X is non-annular, and diffeomorphic to R × S1 otherwise.
There is a natural, isometric inclusion X ,→ S X , which will be enforced to consider
X both as a subsurface of S and of S X . If ∂X ⊆ core(S), then the subsurfaces
core(S X ) and X ∩ core(S) are isotopic in S X . If X has geodesic boundary (and still
consisting of distinct curves), then the two actually coincide.

9

1.1.2

Hyperbolic 3-manifolds

By 3-manifold in this work we mean, unless explicitly stated otherwise, an oriented,
connected, differentiable 3-manifold, possibly non-compact, without boundary unless
otherwise specified, and always of finite type, i.e. homeomorphic to a compact 3manifold (possibly) with boundary, (possibly) with a 2-manifold (with or without
boundary) removed from its boundary.
We refer to [Bon02] for a more precise discussion of most of the facts we are
about to state. In general, (as found by H. Kneser in 1929 and improved later), a
3-manifold M [possibly with boundary, with some extra conditions: in the following
sentences we use square brackets to refer to the adaptations due to cover the case
of manifolds with boundary] admits a subdivision as a connect sum M1 # . . . #Mk
of prime 3-manifolds, i.e. 3-manifolds which do not admit any non-trivial further
subdivision as a connect sum of 3-manifolds; and the factors of this subdivision are
uniquely determined. Prime manifolds are, in particular, irreducible i.e. they contain
no embedded, essential 2-sphere.
Any irreducible manifold M , different from S2 ×S1 , contains a canonical collection
F of essentially embedded tori [and annuli with their boundary along ∂M ] such that
each connected component of M \ F is one of the following (not pairwise exclusive):
Seifert-fibred (i.e. a S1 -bundle over a 2-orbifold); [an interval bundle over a surface;]
atoroidal [and anannular] (i.e. contains no essentially embedded torus [nor annulus
with its boundary along ∂M ]). This is called the JSJ decomposition of M , after
W. Jaco, P. Shalen and K. Johannson.
W.P. Thurston’s Geometrization Conjecture, now a theorem by G. Perelman (see
[CZ06]; [Bon02], Conjecture 4.1; [Fri11], §6), implies that each connected component
in the JSJ decomposition of an irreducible manifold admits a complete, homogeneous
Riemannian metric (i.e. a geometric structure) with totally geodesic boundary.
In particular, one has:
Let M be a 3-manifold which is closed, or is the interior of a compact 3-manifold
whose boundary consists of tori. Suppose M is irreducible, atoroidal, and not Seifertfibered. Then M admits a complete hyperbolic metric.
A proof of this fact, with an extra hypothesis, was found by Thurston himself
([Thu82]). This overview should be sufficient to communicate the dominant role
played by hyperbolic geometry in 3-manifolds, which Thurston correctly foresaw.
Also, in the statement of the Geometrization Theorem, one may require that each
of the connected components of M \F has finite volume under the specified geometric
10

structure: there is only a handful of exceptional manifolds whose JSJ components
cannot satisfy this further request; and none of them is hyperbolic, anyway. So,
from now on, we say that a 3-manifold is hyperbolic if it may be endowed with a
finite-volume, complete hyperbolic structure.
Mostow’s Rigidity Theorem in its classical form (Theorem 5.7.2 in [TM79]) is a
strong statement of uniqueness for these structures:
If M1n and M2n are two complete hyperbolic n-manifolds, for n ≥ 3, with finite
volume, and φ : π1 (M1n ) → π1 (M2n ) is an isomorphism, then there exists a unique
isometry ψ : M1n → M2n inducing φ.

1.2
1.2.1

Graphs attached to a surface
Coarse geometry

We are going to deal with several (in)equalities up to multiplicative and additive
constants. Given four numbers x, y ≥ 0, Q ≥ 1 and q ≥ 0, we write x ≤(Q,q) y (or
y ≥(Q,q) x) to mean x ≤ Qy + q; and x =(Q,q) y to mean x ≤(Q,q) y ≤(Q,q) x. We also
write x ≤Q y, x =Q y to mean x ≤(Q,Q) y, x =(Q,Q) y respectively.
Let G be a graph, with G0 the set of its vertices. G0 is turned into a geodesic
metric space by assigning length one to each of its edges and defining, for each pair
of vertices x, y ∈ G0 , their distance dG (x, y) to be the length of the shortest edge
path connecting them. When A, B ⊆ G0 are non-empty, we define dG (A, B) :=
diamG (A ∪ B).
A map g : I → G0 , where I = J ∩ Z for J ⊆ R an interval (possibly J = R), is a
Q-quasigeodesic if dG (g(a), g(b)) =Q |a − b| for all a, b ∈ I.
A map g as above is a Q-unparametrized quasigeodesic if there is an increasing map
ρ : I 0 → I, where I 0 = J 0 ∩ Z for J 0 ⊆ R again an interval, such that: min ρ(I 0 ) =
min I, max ρ(I 0 ) = max I; g ◦ ρ is a Q-quasigeodesic; if a, b ∈ I are such that ρ(ι) ≤
a ≤ b ≤ ρ(ι + 1) then dG (g(a), g(b)) ≤ Q.
In both definitions, g is also allowed to be a multi-valued function, i.e. a function
with values in the power set, I → P(G0 ); but in this case we require, in addition,
diamG (g(i)) ≤ Q for all i ∈ I.
Note that in this work, when referring to a vertex v of one of the graphs G we
are going to define, we write v ∈ G (when we really mean v ∈ G0 , as above). More
generally, every time G is implicitly regarded as a set, we mean the set of its vertices,
G0 .
11

1.2.2

The curve complex

The parent of all graphs attached to a surface S is the curve graph, extensively studied
in [MM99], [MM00] and further work. The graphs, albeit defined for S a surface, can
also be considered for surfaces with boundary, via C(S) := C (int(S)) and similar
identifications.
Definition 1.2.1. The curve complex of S, denoted C(S), is a simplicial complex
whose vertices correspond to isotopy classes of essential curves in S.
• If ξ(S) > 4, there is an edge between two vertices if and only if the corresponding
curves can be isotoped to be disjoint.
• If S ∼
= S1,1 , there is an edge between two vertices if and only if the corresponding
curves, when isotoped into minimal position, intersect in 1 point.
• If S ∼
= S0,4 , there is an edge between two vertices if and only if the corresponding
curves, when isotoped into minimal position, intersect in 2 points.
A collection of n + 1 vertices in C(S) spans a n-simplex if and only if any two of them
are connected by an edge.
For X a subsurface of S which is not an annulus, the curve complex is defined
just as if it were a stand-alone surface: C(X) := C (int(X)). The obvious map
C0 (X) → C0 (S) is well defined and is an injection.
A special definition is needed when X is an annular subsurface of S. Each vertex
of C(X) will represent an isotopy class, with fixed endpoints, of arcs (paths) properly
embedded into S X with an endpoint on each component of ∂S X . In this graph,
too, there is an edge between two vertices if and only if the corresponding arcs can be
isotoped, fixing their endpoints, to have no intersection in S X . The same construction
as above applies for higher-dimensional skeleta of this graph.
The most direct descendant of the curve graph is the arc graph:
Definition 1.2.2. Suppose S has punctures. The arc complex of S, denoted A(S),
is a simplicial complex whose vertices correspond to classes of essential, properly
embedded arcs in S• under the equivalence relation given by isotopies fixing ∂S•
setwise; and there is an edge between any two vertices if the corresponding arcs can
be isotoped to be disjoint. A collection of n + 1 vertices in A(S) spans a n-simplex
if and only if any two of them are connected by an edge.
The arc and curve complex AC(S) is defined as follows. Its 1-skeleton is obtained
from the 1-skeleton of the disjoint union A(S) t C(S) by adding an edge between a
pair of vertices α ∈ A(S) and γ ∈ C(S) every time α, γ, may be seen as an arc and
12

a curve, respectively, in S• , which can be isotoped (relatively to the boundary, resp.)
to be disjoint. Again, a collection of n + 1 vertices in AC(S) spans a n-simplex if and
only if any two of them are connected by an edge.
Definition 1.2.3. For X ⊆ S a subsurface, the subsurface projection πX : C(S) →
P(C(X)) is defined as follows (see [MM00], §2.3, 2.4).
• If X is not an annulus: first of all, there is a natural map ψX : AC0 (X) →
P (C0 (X)) which maps each α ∈ C0 (X) to {α} and each β ∈ A0 (X) to the set
of all isotopy classes of connected components of ∂N (β ∪∂X) which are essential
in X (they are 1 or 2). Here N (β ∪ ∂X) is a narrow, regular neighbourhood in

X. One extends ψX : P AC0 (X) → P (C0 (X)) naturally by defining ψX (A)
as the union of ψX (a) over a ∈ A.

0
: C0 (S) → P AC0 (X) . Given α ∈ C0 (S): if
There is also a natural map πX
0
α ∈ C0 (X) then, simply, πX
(α) := {α}. If α can be isotoped to lie completely
0
out of X, then πX (α) := ∅. Otherwise α intersects ∂X essentially; in this case,
identify α with a representative of its isotopy class minimizing the number of
0
intersection points with ∂X, and set πX
(α) := α ∩ X, considered as a subset
of A0 (X) (minimality of the number of intersection points implies that α ∩ X
consists of essential arcs only).
0
(α)). For A ⊆ C0 (S) we define again
Now, for α ∈ C0 (S), let πX (α) := ψX (πX
S
πX (A) := α∈A πX (α).
• If X is an annulus: given α ∈ C0 (S), set πX (α) = ∅ if α does not intersect
the core curve of X essentially (including the case of α being the core curve of
X). Else, consider the preimage α̃ of α in S X under the covering map S X → S:
α̃ consists of an infinite family of disjoint, quasi-geodesic paths. In particular
each of them has two well-defined endpoints on ∂S X . Let then πX (α) be the set
of all connected components in α̃ which connect the two connected components
of ∂S X .
For A, B ⊆ C0 (S) we use the shorthand notation dX (A, B) := dC(X) (πX (A), πX (B)).
Note that the subsurface projection of any curve onto any subsurface, if nonempty,
has always diameter ≤ 1.
Some literature, including [MMS12] which will be employed many times in the
0
present work, define the subsurface projection to be the map denoted πX
above.
However, AC(X) includes C(X) quasi-isometrically and these two versions of projection commute with that inclusion (again up to quasi-isometries): this is the only

13

relevant aspect for us so we can stick with our definition, even if this might require
changing some of the quasi-equality constants in the statements that will be quoted.
We recall a couple of useful lemmas about distances in curve complexes:
Lemma 1.2.4 (Lemma 1.2, [Bow06]). If S is a surface and α1 , α2 ∈ C(S), then
dC(S) (α1 , α2 ) ≤ F (i(α1 , α2 ))
for a function F : N → N with F (n) = O(log n), and independent of S.
Remark 1.2.5. An observation which will be useful in several occasions when applying Lemma 1.2.4 above is the following: if X ⊆ S is a non-annular subsurface and
α1 , α2 are curves in C(S) with πX (α1 ), πX (α2 ) 6= ∅, then for any α10 ∈ πX (α1 ), α20 ∈
πX (α2 ) the intersection number i(α10 , α20 ) ≤ 4i(α1 , α2 ) + 4.
We may identify α1 , α2 with two representatives that intersect transversely, realize
the intersection number between their isotopy classes, and minimize the number of
intersection points with ∂X. Let N1 (∂X), N2 (∂X) be two narrow, regular neighbourhoods of ∂X in S, with N̄1 (∂X) ⊆ N2 (∂X). By definition of subsurface projection,
for i = 1, 2, we may consider αi0 to be realized as the union of a set ai consisting of
one or two parallel ‘copies’ of a connected component of (αi ∩ X) \ Ni (∂X); and a

set bi which, if nonempty, consists of one or two segments of ∂ N̄i (∂X) ∩ X. The
set bi is empty (and ai = αi0 ) exactly when αi0 = αi . For the purposes of the following discussion, we may suppose that, for each choice of i, j ∈ {1, 2}, each connected
component of ai ∩ Nj (∂X) contains a point of ai ∩ ∂X.
Each intersection point between α10 and α20 is either:
• an intersection point between a1 and a2 , which is to say, a ‘copy’ of an intersection point between α1 and α2 which is contained in X; considering that each
of a1 , a2 consists of at most two parallel ‘copies’ of an essential arc or curve in
X, each intersection point between α1 , α2 admits at most 4 ‘copies’ among the
intersection points between a1 , a2 .
• an intersection point between a1 and b2 : a1 ∩ b2 consists of at most 4 points,
each close to a different extremity of an arc constituting a1 .
Necessarily, b1 ∩ b2 = b1 ∩ a2 = ∅. Hence our claim.
Lemma 1.2.6 (§2.4, [MM00]). If X ⊂ S is an annulus and α1 , α2 ∈ C0 (X) (α1 6=
α2 ), then dC(X) (α1 , α2 ) = 1 + i(α1 , α2 ). Moreover C(X) is quasi-isometric to Z.

14

If α1 , α2 ∈ C(X) for X ⊂ S an annular subsurface, i(α1 , α2 ) is defined to be the
minimum number of intersection points between α1 , α2 attained when deforming both
arcs within their respective isotopy class with fixed endpoints. Extreme points on ∂S X
do not count as intersection points.
Theorem 1.1 from [MM99] asserts that there is a δ = δ(S) > 0 such that C(S) is
δ-hyperbolic. It has been proved later (see e.g. [Bow14], Theorem 1.1, or [HPW15],
Theorem 1.1) that there exists a universal value δ > 0 such that C(S) is δ-hyperbolic
for all surfaces S. In Lemma 1.2.6 above we have recalled that, for X ⊆ S an annular
subsurface, C(X) is quasi-isometric to Z. This implies, as recalled by Lemma 6.6
from [MMS12], that a reverse triangle inequality will hold for distances in it. Here
we rephrase it in a way that refers to this setting only:
Lemma 1.2.7. For any surface S as above and any Q > 0 there is a constant R0 =
R0 (S, Q) such that, if X ⊆ S is a subsurface and f : [l, m] → P (C0 (X)) is a Qunparametrized quasi-geodesic, then for any l ≤ a ≤ b ≤ c ≤ m, if α = f (a), β =
f (b), γ = f (c) then
d(α, β) + d(β, γ) ≤ d(α, γ) + R0 .
Uniform hyperbolicity of curve complexes implies that, in this statement, R0 may well
be considered as depending on Q only.

1.2.3

Pants and marking graphs

Two of the most immediate descendants of the curve complex are the pants graph
and the marking graph. We define them as following [MM00], §2, §6 and §8.
A pants decomposition for a surface S with ξ(S) ≥ 4 is a maximal collection of
essential, pairwise disjoint isotopy classes of curves {α1 , . . . , αn } in S. Equivalently,
once a set of pairwise disjoint representatives for {α1 , . . . , αn } is chosen, its complement in S will consist of a number of pairs of pants ∼
= S0,3 .
We say, instead, that a possibly infinite collection A ⊆ C(S) fills S if any other
essential curve on S intersects a curve in A. If A = {α1 , . . . , αn } a finite set, then
this is equivalent to saying that, once a set of representatives has been chosen for
{α1 , . . . , αn }, with pairwise minimal number of intersection points, its complement in
S consists of a number of topological open discs ∼
= S0,1 and 1-punctured discs S0,2 .
Given a collection of curves on S, either finite or infinite, there is always a subsurface of S they fill; and it is unique up to isotopies in S. So when we speak of the
subsurface filled by the given collection, we mean its isotopy class or any representative of that class.
15

A complete marking is a collection of pairs {p1 = (α1 , t1 ), . . . , pn = (αn , tn )} such
that {α1 , . . . , αn } is a pants decomposition of S and, for each i, ti ⊂ C (N (αi )) (called
transversal) is a nonempty set of diameter 1. A complete marking is clean if, for each
i, a curve βi ⊂ S exists such that: N (αi ∪ βi ) is either a 1-punctured torus or a
4-punctured sphere; παi (βi ) = ti ; and βi is disjoint from αj for all j 6= i. If such βi ’s
exists, they are unique.
If a complete marking is not clean, a clean marking which is compatible with it
is one whose base pants decomposition is the same, while each transversal set has
the minimum distance possible from the original one, among all the clean complete
markings with the same base pants decomposition. For a subdomain Y ⊂ S, the
projection πY (µ) of a marking µ is defined as follows: when Y is an annulus whose
core is one of the αi , then πY (µ) = ti . When Y is any other subsurface (including
S
other annuli), πY (µ) = i πY (αi ). A simplified version of this definition is given for
pants decomposition.
Definition 1.2.8. The marking graph M(S) of a surface S is a graph whose vertices
correspond to all possible clean complete markings on S. There is a vertex between
each
couple
of
markings
((α1 , πα1 (β1 )), . . . , (αn , παn (βn )))
and

0
0
0
0
(α1 , πα01 (β1 )), . . . , (αn , πα0n (βn )) that are obtained from each other with one of these
moves:
• twist: the only difference between the two markings is that βi0 is obtained from
βi by performing a twist or a half twist (depending on #αi ∩ βi ) around αi ;
• flip: all the couples are the same, except for one where αi and βi have had their
roles swapped, and the complete marking thus obtained has been then replaced
with a compatible clean one.
The pants graph P(S) of S is a graph whose vertices correspond to all possible
pants decompositions S. Two vertices are joined by an edge if and only if the corresponding pants decompositions can be completed to clean complete markings which
are obtained from each other with a flip move.
Note that, if S ∼
= S0,4 or S1,1 , then P(S) coincides with the 1-skeleton of C(S).
Distances in the pants and the marking graphs are usually investigated via subsurface projections (Theorem 6.12 from [MM00]): consistently with Definition 1.2.3,
the subsurface projection of a pants decomposition is just the union of the projections
of all curves constituting it.

16

Theorem 1.2.9. There exists a constant M6 (S) such that, given M > M6 , there are
constants e0 , e1 only depending on M and S such that, for any pair of complete clean
markings µI , µT on S:
X

[dX (µI , µT )]M =(e0 ,e1 ) dM (µI , µT );

X⊆S

and, for any pair of pants decompositions pI , pT ,
X
[dX (pI , pT )] =(e0 ,e1 ) dP (pI , pT ).
X⊆S
X is not an annulus

Here [x]M := x if x ≥ M , and 0 otherwise. The summations shall be meant over
X ⊆ S subsurfaces, where each isotopy class of subsurfaces is counted only once.

1.2.4

The quasi-pants graph

We will never really employ the given definition of marking graph: we will use a
construction given in [MMS12] instead. Let k1 be the maximum self-intersection
number of a complete clean marking on S, and let `1 be the maximum intersection
number between any two complete clean markings on S obtained from each other via
an elementary move. Fix any k ≥ k1 , ` ≥ `1 . Then we can redefine M+ (S) to be
the graph whose vertices consist of collections of essential, distinct isotopy classes of
curves on S which fill the surface and have self-intersection number ≤ k; and there is
an edge between any two vertices corresponding to collections of curves intersecting
in at most ` points. This graph, depending on the parameters k, `, is shown to be
quasi-isometric to M(S) (with constants depending on k, `). And the first formula
in Theorem 1.2.9 holds for estimating distances in M+ (S) as well, if one chooses
suitable M ≥ M6 (S, k, `); ej = ej (S, M, k, `) (j = 0, 1) and the functions M6 , e0 , e1
are suitably defined.
With the pants graph, we perform a similar construction:
Definition 1.2.10. A quasi-pants graph P+ (S) is defined as follows. Fix two parameters k, ` ≥ 0.
• Each vertex of the graph represents a collection {α1 , . . . , αm } of essential, distinct isotopy classes of curves of S such that, when a set of representatives
minimizing the number of mutual intersection is chosen, this number is ≤ k;
and with one of the following, equivalent, properties:
a) each isotopy class in C(S) either is one of the αj , or intersects one of the
αj (however the representatives are chosen);
17

b) given a set of representatives for the {α1 , . . . , αm }, minimizing the number
of mutual intersection, its complement in S is a collection of topological
open discs, 1-punctured discs, and pairs of pants;
c) Let X be the subsurface of S filled by {α1 , . . . , αm } (possibly one which is
not connected and with annular components); then S \ X is a collection of
(closed) pairs of pants.
In particular, vertices include all pants decompositions of S.
• There is an edge between two vertices µ and ν if and only if i(µ, ν) ≤ `.
We only consider values of ` for which the graph is connected and each vertex has
distance at most 1 from a pants decomposition.
Remark 1.2.11. There is a number `1 ≥ 0 such that all values ` > `1 are acceptable
for the last sentence of the above definition. Two pants decompositions which are
adjacent in the pants graph have mutual intersection number 1 or 2: thus, for ` ≥ 2,
the subgraph of P+ (S) having pants decompositions as vertices is connected, because
among its edges there are all the ones of P(S), which is connected.
Moreover, note that orbits under the action of Mod(S) on P+ (S) are finitely many,
so there is a finite bound for m = maxµ∈P+ (S) minp∈P(S) i(µ, p). A suitable value for
`1 is then just max{2, m}.
The parameters k, ` for M+ (S) and P+ (S) will be fixed once and for all after having introduced train tracks (see Remark 2.1.26). Meanwhile we prove the following:
Lemma 1.2.12. The injection ι : P0 (S) → P+ 0 (S) of the vertex set of the first
graph into the second one is a quasi-isometry, with constants depending on S, k, `.
In particular, the second formula in Theorem 1.2.9 holds for distance estimation in
P+ (S) as well, if we choose M ≥ M6 (S, k, `); ej = ej (S, M, k, `) (j = 0, 1) for suitably
defined functions M6 , e0 , e1 .
In order for the mentioned formula to make sense, we are extending naturally to
vertices of P+ (S) our notion of subsurface projection, and the notation dX . A similar
statement concerning the graphs we have denoted M+ (S) and M(S) is implicitly
used in [MMS12], §6.
Proof. It suffices to show that ι is a quasi-isometric embedding because, by definition
of P+ (S), the 1-neighbourhood of ι (P(S)) is the entire P+ (S).
The inequality dP+ (ι(p), ι(q)) ≤ dP (p, q) holds for any p, q ∈ P(S): if two vertices
of P(S) are connected by an edge then so are their images in P+ (S), by Remark
1.2.11 above.
18

We only need to prove an inequality in the opposite direction. To do so, we build a
map Φ : P+ (S) → P(S) which will turn out to be a quasi-inverse of ι: for µ ∈ P+ (S)
let X(µ) be the (possibly disconnected) subsurface of S filled by µ. Set Φ(µ) to be a
pants decomposition including all curves of ∂X(µ) and chosen so that the intersection
number between it and µ is minimal among all pants decompositions with the specified
condition. We may suppose that Φ is Mod(S)-equivariant: Φ(ψ · µ) = ψ · Φ(µ) for all
ψ self-homeomorphism of S. As the orbits of Mod(S) in P+ 0 (S) are finitely many,
there are two numbers a, a0 such that i(µ, Φ(µ)) ≤ a and dP+ (µ, Φ(µ)) ≤ a0 for all µ.
Note that Φ ◦ ι = idP(S) .
Take any µ, ν ∈ P+ (S) with dP+ (µ, ν) = 1; then i(µ, ν) ≤ `. Let X be the
(possibly disconnected) subsurface of S filled by µ. The bound on the intersection
number yields that there is a finite family A(µ) ⊆ P+ (S) such that ν is obtained from
an element of A(µ) by Dehn twisting about some components of ∂X. The association
µ 7→ A(µ) can be supposed to be equivariant under homeomorphisms of S. Again by
finiteness of the number of orbits, there is a global upper bound b for the size of A(µ),
and also a bound b0 for dP (Φ(µ), Φ(ν)) for any µ ∈ P+ (S), ν ∈ A(µ); and therefore
for any µ, ν at distance 1 from each other.
This means that, more generally, dP (Φ(µ), Φ(ν)) ≤ b0 dP+ (µ, ν) for any µ, ν: given
a geodesic connecting the two, we get an upper bound for the length of a path joining
the images of the vertices under Φ. In particular, if p, q ∈ P(S), then dP (p, q) ≤
b0 dP+ (ι(p), ι(q)). The bound b0 depends only on S, k, `.
We now prove the second part of the lemma’s statement. Given any µ ∈ P+ (S)
and X ⊆ S a non-annular subsurface, i(µ, Φ(µ)) ≤ a implies that, given any α10 ∈
πX (µ), α20 ∈ πX (Φ(µ)), we have i(α10 , α20 ) ≤ 4a + 4 by Remark 1.2.5, therefore
dX (µ, Φ(µ)) ≤ max {F (k), F (4a + 4)} by Lemma 1.2.4.

Hence there is number

β = β(S) such that, for any µ, ν ∈ P+ (S), |dX (µ, ν) − dX (Φ(µ), Φ(ν))| ≤ β.
Given M ≥ max{M6 (S), β(S)}, where M6 is defined as in Theorem 1.2.9, we get
the following chain of inequalities. We neglect indices on summations, as they will
always range over all isotopy classes of non-annular subsurfaces X ⊂ S; and we write
simply dX for dX (µ, ν) and dX Φ for dX (Φ(µ), Φ(ν)).
dP+ (µ, ν) ≤ dP+ (Φ(µ), Φ(ν)) + 2a0 ≤ dP (Φ(µ), Φ(ν)) + 2a0 ≤
P
P
e0 (M ) [dX Φ]M + e1 (M ) + 2a0 ≤ e0 (M ) [dX + β]M + e1 (M ) + 2a0 ≤
P
P
e0 (M ) ([dX ]M −β + βX ) + e1 (M ) + 2a0 ≤ e0 (M )(1 + β) [dX ]M −β + e1 (M ) + 2a0 .

19

Here we have denoted with βX a quantity which is equal to β only if [dX ]M −β 6= 0;
else it is also 0. For the other inequality:
dP+ (µ, ν) ≥ dP+ (Φ(µ), Φ(ν)) − 2a0 ≥ (b0 )−1 dP (Φ(µ), Φ(ν)) − 2a0 ≥
P
P
(b0 e0 (M ))−1 [dX Φ]M − e1 (M ) − 2a0 ≥ (b0 e0 (M ))−1 [dX − β]M − e1 (M ) − 2a0 ≥
P
(b0 e0 (M ))−1 MM+β [dX ]M +β − e1 (M ) − 2a0 .
So, we have that a formula as in Theorem 1.2.9 holds for distances in P+ (S),
too. Denoting with a 0 the quantities related with P+ (S) rather than P(S), we

	
choose M60 (S) = max{M6 (S), β(S)} + β(S); e00 (M ) = e0 (M ) max 1 + β, b0 MM+β ,
e01 (M ) = e1 (M ) + 2. Dependence of these new parameters from k, ` is hidden in the
constants a0 , β and b0 .

1.3



Hyperbolic volume estimates

In theory, given a hyperbolic 3-manifold — we know from Mostow Rigidity that no
3-manifold is hyperbolic in two different ways — one may work out its volume by
triangulating it with ideal tetrahedra, and then looking for a solution for Thurston’s
gluing consistency equations (see [TM79], Chapter 4). But, other than a precise
computation of volume from a given, fixed hyperbolic 3-manifold, it is interesting
to understand if one may work out the volume from some topological ‘parameter’
in a given class of 3-manifold, albeit not precisely but only up to multiplicative and
additive constants. Here we give two examples of this.

1.3.1

Links complements in S3 , and the guts approach

Let K ⊂ S3 be a link (a smooth embedding of a number of disjoint copies of S1 ). It is a
result of W.P. Thurston (see for instance Theorem 10.5.1, [Kaw12]) that every knot K
in S3 satisfies one and only one of the following: it is a torus knot; it is a satellite knot
(including composite knots); its complement admits a complete hyperbolic metric
with finite volume.
So, when a knot is prime, it is ‘likely’ to fall in the third case (from now on: we
say, simply, that the knot, or link, is hyperbolic). There is no classification for links
that works as well as the one given above for knots, but from the underlying idea
that a ‘majority’ of link is hyperbolic is still true, via Thurston’s Geometrization (see
§1.1.2). Many explicit classes of hyperbolic links are known (see e.g. [Ada05] for an
account), and it is a matter of interest how the hyperbolic volume of the complement
is related with properties which be readable from a link diagram.
20

Results in this field have been established by Lackenby — for links which admit an alternating diagram, see [Lac04] — and by Futer–Kalfagianni–Purcell — for
Montesinos links and for a subclass of the closed braids called positive, see [FKP12].
They all descend from a theorem of Ian Agol ([Ago], made sharper in [AST07]), which
reads as follows. If S is a surface bounded by K, which ‘does not admit simplifications’ in S3 \ K, and M := S3 \ N (S), then vol(S3 \ K) ≥ aχ(guts(M )), for a a
constant and guts(M ) being the union of the atoroidal and anannular components
arising from the JSJ decomposition.
Lackenby’s result is that, if a hyperbolic link K has a prime, alternating diagram
D then vol(S3 \ K) =A t(D) for A a constant and t(D) the number of twist regions
in the diagram, i.e. maximal concatenations of bigons in S2 \ D. A crossing of D
which is not adjacent to a bigon counts as a crossing. The theorem is established
via a careful choice of a surface S bounding K and obtained from D and then using
Agol’s theorem for the lower bound, and a clever triangulation for the upper bound.
The result of Futer–Kalfagianni–Purcell is established via a heavy generalization of
Lackenby’s machinery.

1.3.2

Mapping tori, and pants distance

Given S a surface and ψ : S → S is a suitable homeomorphism (or mapping class),
the corresponding mapping torus is a 3-manifold M ∼
= S ×I/ ∼ψ , where I = [0, 1], and
∼ψ is the equivalence relation that identifies each point (x, 0), x ∈ S, with (ψ(x), 1).
A mapping torus is in particular a fibre bundle over S1 , with fibre S. The map ψ is
called the monodromy of the mapping torus.
We distinguish among three kinds of behaviour for ψ:
• ψ has finite order if some n > 0 exists such that ψ n is isotopic to idS ;
• ψ is reducible if there is a multicurve on S which is fixed by ψ, up to isotopy;
• ψ is pseudo-Anosov if neither it has finite order nor it is reducible.
It is worth recalling some basic concepts: we follow the summary given in [Thu98].
Further details, with partially different conventions, may be found in [CB88], chapters
3–6 or in [PH91], §1.6, §1.7, Chapter 3. A geodesic lamination on a surface S is a closed
subset of S which is a disjoint union of geodesics, called leaves of the lamination.
Let λ be a geodesic lamination; consider a function µ : T (λ) → R≥0 , where T (λ)
is the set of all compact 1-manifolds embedded in S and intersecting the leaves of λ
transversely (the 1-manifolds’ boundaries, in particular, are disjoint from λ). We say
that µ is a transverse measure on λ if it has the following properties. The function
µ is σ-additive, meaning that, for each countable family {αi }i∈N ⊆ T (λ) such that
21

(i 6= j ⇒ αi ∩ αj = ∂αi ∩ ∂αj ) and that α :=

S

αi ∈ T (λ), we have µ(α) =

P

µ(αi ).

Given α0 , α1 ∈ T (λ) two manifolds which are isotopic via a continuous family of
αt ∈ T (λ), t ∈ [0, 1], we have µ(α0 ) = µ(α1 ). If α ∈ T (λ) is actually disjoint from λ,
then µ(α) = 0.
A measured lamination is a pair (λ, µ) where λ is a lamination and µ is a tranverse
measure for λ, with full support i.e. µ(α) 6= 0 for all α ∈ T (λ) not disjoint from λ.
We say that a lamination is minimal if each half-leaf of λ is dense in λ and that it fills
S if S \ λ consists of a number of contractible connected components and peripheral
annuli. Rephrasing a classical theorem of Thurston (cf. [T+ 88], Theorem 4; [FLP12],
Theorem 1.6; or [Thu98], Theorem 2.5):
Theorem 1.3.1. The map ψ : S → S is a pseudo-Anosov homeomorphism if and
only if there exist a pair of minimal measured laminations (λs , µs ), (λu , µu ) filling S,
a constant c > 1 and a homeomorphism ψ 0 , isotopic to ψ, such that
(ψ(λs ), ψ∗ µs ) = (λs , c−1 µs ) and

(ψ(λu ), ψ∗ µu ) = (λu , cµu ).

The constant c is unique, and the two measured laminations are unique up to scaling
of the assigned transverse measure. They are called stable lamination and unstable
lamination, respectively.
Remark 1.3.2. As an immediate consequence, if ψ is pseudo-Anosov and n 6= 0,
then ψ n is also pseudo-Anosov.
In [Thu98] it is proved that each of the three possibilities listed above has a precise
consequence on the JSJ characterization of a mapping torus:
Theorem 1.3.3. Let M be a mapping torus, equal to S × I∼ψ where S is a surface,
and ψ is a self-homeomorphism of S. Then
• M is Seifert-fibered if and only if ψ has finite order;
• M contains an essential embedded torus if and only if ψ is reducible;
• M is hyperbolic if and only if ψ is pseudo-Anosov.
In [Bro03a], [Bro03b], Brock proves (in particular) the following result.
Theorem 1.3.4. Let S be a surface. Two constants e2 = e2 (S), e3 = e3 (S) exist
such that, if ψ : S → S is a pseudo-Anosov homeomorphism and M = S × I/ ∼ψ is
the corresponding mapping torus (which is hyperbolic), then
vol(M ) =(e2 ,e3 ) |ψ|.
Here, |ψ| denotes the translation distance of the map induced by ψ on P(S).
22

Given a homeomorphism ψ : S → S, the translation distance induced by ψ in P(S)
is the quantity |ψ|P(S) := min{d(v, ψ · v)|v ∈ vertices of P(S)}. The stable translation
n
distance induced by ψ is, instead, |ψ|st
P(S) := limn→∞ d(v, ψ · v)/n where v is any
fixed vertex of P(S). This latter quantity is well-defined and not depending on v, for
general facts about metric spaces — see [BH99], Chapter II.6, §6.6. Consequently,
via triangle inequality, one has |ψ|st
P(S) ≤ |ψ|P(S) .
Remark 1.3.5. We prove that there is a constant e4 = e4 (S) such that, if ψ ∈
Mod(S) is pseudo-Anosov, then
|ψ|P(S) =e4 |ψ|st
P(S)
.
Theorem 3.2 in [Bro03a] shows that there is a map Q : P0 (S) → Teich(S),
equivariant under the action of Mod(S) on the two metric spaces. Here Teich(S)
is the Teichmüller space of S, equipped with the Weil-Petersson metric. Let |ψ|W P ,
|ψ|st
W P be the translation distance and the stable translation distance, respectively,
induced by ψ in Teich(S); they are defined in an entirely similar way as in the pants
graph. The theorem we have just mentioned implies that |ψ|W P , |ψ|P(S) are equal up
st
to multiplicative and additive errors; and the same is true of |ψ|st
W P , |ψ|P(S) .

In addition to what we have already noted earlier, we have to prove that |ψ|P(S) ≤e4
st
|ψ|st
P(S) . We claim that |ψ|W P ≤ |ψ|W P , which implies the desired inequality.
By Theorem 1.1 in [DW03], there is a unique ψ-equivariant, complete geodesic g

in Teich(S) i.e. an axis for the action of ψ. Let x ∈ g: then |ψ|W P ≤ dW P (x, ψ · x),
and note that dW P (x, ψ n · x) = n · dW P (g, ψ · g) because the distance between x,
ψ n · x is realized as the segment of g between these two points. Therefore also
|ψ|st
W P = dW P (g, ψ · g) and the claim is proved.
An equality similar to the one just shown holds for translation distance and stable
translation distance in C(S), due to the reverse triangle inequality in Lemma 1.2.7.

1.4

The role of train tracks

Train tracks on a surface S will be properly defined in §2.1. Informally, a train track is
a 1-complex on S with the property that each vertex is ‘smoothed out’ i.e. there is one
selected edge incident to the vertex, such that one may proceed smoothly from this
edge to any other one. Train tracks were introduced by Thurston (see [TM79], §8.9)
to study geodesic laminations: informally, given a lamination, it is always possible to

23

‘squeeze’ bands consisting of parallel segments of its leaves, and turn the lamination
into a train track ([PH91], Theorem 1.6.5); as a particular case, one may do this for a
(multi)curve. We say, then, that the train track carries a lamination or a (multi)curve
when one may draw a family of smooth paths along the track which is isotopic to the
lamination or (multi)curve.
A track τ , in general, will carry a huge quantity of different laminations and
(multi)curves. The set C(τ ) ⊆ C(S) of the curves carried by τ , in particular, includes
ones which travel along the edges of τ a high number of times: but there is a finite
family V (τ ) ⊆ C(τ ) collecting the simplest ones. A split is a move on a train track
which turns it into a new one, τ 0 , with C(τ 0 ) ⊆ C(τ ); and in general, each curve in
C(τ 0 ) traverses the branches of τ 0 fewer times than the ones in τ .
What makes train tracks particularly interesting, then, is that a splitting sequence
of train tracks i.e. a sequence (τj )j≥0 of iterated splits on a train track, will change
the set V (τj ) so that, by following them, we move through C(S) keeping, roughly,
always the same direction. To start with, splitting sequences were used to prove the
hyperbolicity of the curve complex in [MM99]. Some formal statements are given in
§2.3, but we stress here that Masur and Minsky proved in [MM04] that (V (τj ))j≥0 is an
unparametrized quasi-geodesic in the curve complex. This property is complemented
by the fact that C(S) \ C(τ0 ) is quasi-convex, as shown in [GS14]. Recent work
[MMS12] of Masur, Mosher and Schleimer — the one that motivates this thesis —
has shown that if some extra, mild hypotheses are met, then this sequence is a true
quasi-geodesic in M+ (S).
Furthermore, it is worth pointing out that the reason which motivated the introduction of train tracks is also reflected into the behaviour at infinity of a splitting
sequence. The sets of all laminations carried by τj are also a decreasing family in
j. The monograph [Mos03] of Mosher explores how, and in what circumstances, the
splitting sequence ‘converges’ to a lamination (Mosher actually uses the language of
foliations instead). Also notably, the paper [Ham06] of Hamenstädt uses train track
splitting sequences to construct a natural identification of the Gromov boundary of
C(S) with a suitable subspace of the space of geodesic laminations.
Train tracks and their splitting sequences, then, provide a combinatorial, concrete
way of understanding some aspects of the geometry of the surface-related graphs
defined in §1.2 and of their closest relatives, e.g. Teichmüller spaces. The present
thesis follows this current.

24

Chapter 2
Train tracks and pants distance
2.1
2.1.1

Train tracks: basics
Definition. Tie neighbourhoods

Our basic definitions are largely inspired by the ones of [MMS12] and of [Mos03], but
they will not coincide entirely with those.
Definition 2.1.1. A pretrack on a surface S (resp. on S X where X ⊆ S is a nonperipheral annulus) is a 1-complex τ smoothly, properly embedded in S (resp. S X )
such that, for each of its vertices v, there are a tangent line L ⊂ Tv S (resp. Tv S X )
and a compact neighbourhood S (resp. S X ) ⊃ U 3 v, such that the following is true.
U is homeomorphic to a disc; the boundary of U is piecewise smooth; U includes no
other vertex of τ and intersects no edge which is not incident with v; τ ∩ Ū is a union
of smooth, properly embedded paths in U , with their endpoints on ∂ Ū , each passing
through v and such that its tangent line at v is L. Vertices of τ are called switches,
and edges are called branches.
A pretrack is semigeneric if, for any switch v, there is a neighbourhood U as above,
with the following extra property: there is a point x ∈ ∂ Ū such that, for each of the
aforementioned smooth paths which make up τ ∩ U , x is one of its endpoints. A
pretrack is generic if each switch (vertex) is 3-valent.
All pretracks in the present work are (at least) semigeneric: we will not specify it
again. We will use the adjective ‘semigeneric’ only when we wish to stress that a
pretrack is not necessarily generic.
Fix a branch b of a pretrack τ , and consider the family F of all closed segments
contained in b such that exactly one of their endpoints is a switch of τ . Moreover,
consider the smallest equivalence relation on F which contains the inclusion relation
⊆: it partitions F into two equivalence classes that, in a self-descriptive manner, are
25

called branch ends. Occasionally, we use the term ‘branch end’ also in reference to a
fixed element of F .
Consider a switch v of τ and the above construction of the neighbourhood U and
the point x. There is only one branch end that reaches v from the direction of x: it
will be called large. All other branch ends at v are called small. A branch is large or
small if both its ends are; it is mixed if its ends are of opposite kinds.
We denote B(τ ) the set of all branches of τ . A pretrack σ is a subtrack of τ if
σ ⊆ τ as sets.
Again, let X ⊆ S be a non-peripheral annulus. Occasionally, we will use the
term generalized pretrack for τ = τ̄ ∩ S X , where τ̄ is a 1-complex smoothly, properly
embedded in S X such that all its vertices v which lie in S X have a tangent line L and
a compact neighbourhood U as in the above definition. In a generalized pretrack, only
vertices lying in S X will be called switches, while all edges are still called branches.
The concept of subtrack is easily extended: in particular, among the subtracks of a
non-compact pretrack, there may be some which are only generalized pretracks.
Any semigeneric pretrack τ can be endowed with a tie neighbourhood : the following construction is a variation of the one given in [MMS12].
Definition 2.1.2. Fix ε > 0 small. Given any representative e of a branch end in a
semigeneric pretrack τ , let v be the switch which serves as an endpoint of e: a branch
end rectangle is a smooth, orientation-preserving embedding Re : [a, 1+ε]×[−1, +1] →
S (resp. S X ), where −1 < a < 1, such that:
• Rb ([a, 1] × {0}) = e, Rb (1, 0) = v;
• Rb ([1 − ε, 1 + ε] × [−1, 1]) is a compact neighbourhood of v testifying (like the
U used in Definition 2.1.1) that the graph τ satisfies the condition defining a
semigeneric pretrack at the vertex v;
• a branch of τ intersects the image of Re if and only if v is one of its switches;
• for all a ≤ t ≤ 1 + ε, the arc αte := Re ({t} × [−1, 1]) is transverse to any smooth
path embedded in τ and intersecting αte .
Let now b be a branch of τ . A branch rectangle for b is a map Rb : [−1 − ε, 1 + ε] ×
[−1, 1] → S (resp. S X ) such that, for two suitable numbers −1 < a1 < a2 < 1, the
maps Re1 : [a1 , 1 + ε] × [−1, 1] → S (resp. S X ) defined by restriction of Rb , and Re2 :
[−a2 , 1 + ε] × [−1, 1] → S (resp. S X ) defined by Re2 (x, y) := Rb (−x, −y) are branch
end rectangles relative to the branch end representatives e1 := Rb ([a1 , 1 + ε] × {0})
and e2 := Rb ([−1−ε, a2 ]×{0}), respectively. A branch rectangle is not an embedding

26

Re1

intersection area

∂h N̄ (τ )

∂v N̄ (τ )

Re

Re2
∂v N̄ (τ )
Re3

e
α1−ε

∂h N̄ (τ )

e
α1+ε

Figure 2.1: This is the local picture of how the images of the functions Re overlap in the
neighbourhood of a switch of τ . The dashed vertical lines are two examples
of ties. The tie neighbourhood N̄ (τ ) is coloured in grey.

exactly when the two switches that delimit the branch b coincide: in this case, its
image is not really diffeomorphic to a rectangle.
A tie neighbourhood for τ , denoted N̄ (τ ), is specified by a family of branch end
rectangles {Re }e∈E where E is a family of branch end representatives such that τ =
S
e∈E e, no branch end has two distinct representatives in E and, if the union of
e1 , e2 ∈ E is a branch, then e1 ∩ e2 consists of more than one point. We list now
a number of ‘consistency’ conditions that the branch end rectangles Re are required
to meet. Taking care of avoiding confusion, here and in the rest of this work we use
Re to denote both a branch end rectangle and its image; we do the same for branch
rectangles.
• The intersection of any two branch end rectangles Re , Re0 (e, e0 ∈ E) is either
connected or empty. More precisely, if e ∪ e0 is a branch of τ , or e, e0 meet at a
switch of τ , then Re ∩ Re0 6= ∅ (so this set is connected); if neither of these is
true, we require Re ∩ Re0 = ∅.
• When Re ∩ Re0 6= ∅, we require that the set αt := Re ({t} × [−1, 1]) ∩ Re0
is connected for all t for which it is defined and not empty. Same for αt0 :=
Re0 ({t} × [−1, 1]) ∩ Re . Furthermore, the families {αt }t , {αt0 }t are required to
define the same foliation of Re ∩ Re0 , possibly with some leaves degenerating to
single points.
Suppose now that, at a switch v of τ , a large branch end representative e ∈ E is
meeting a collection of small branch end representatives e1 , . . . , ek ∈ E. The following
requests ensure that the rectangles get assembled as shown in Figure 2.1.
• Re ({1 ± ε} × [−1, 1]) ⊇ Rei ({1 ∓ ε} × [−1, 1]) for all i = 1, . . . , k (here the signs
±, ∓ mean that this expression summarizes two equalities).
27

• For i 6= j, the segments Rei ({1 − ε} × [−1, 1]) and Rej ({1 − ε} × [−1, 1]) are
disjoint.
• There are two indices 1 ≤ i+, i− ≤ k such that Re ([1 − ε, 1 + ε] × {1}) =
Rei+ ([1−ε, 1+ε]×{−1}) and Re ([1−ε, 1+ε]×{−1}) = Rei− ([1−ε, 1+ε]×{1}).
Suppose, finally, that the union of e1 , e2 ∈ E is a branch b of τ .
• There must exist a branch rectangle Rb that restricts to Re1 , Re2 in the sense
specified by the above definition.
Usually we identify N̄ (τ ) with the union of all branch end rectangles that constitute it. We denote with N (τ ) the interior of N̄ (τ ): it is an open, regular neighbourhood of τ .
An arc α ⊆ ∂ N̄ (τ ) that, when intersected with any Re (e ∈ E), is the image of
a vertical segment {t} × [−1, 1] is called a tie. All ties intersect τ transversally and
together they specify a foliation of N̄ (τ ).
The boundary ∂ N̄ (τ ) can be subdivided into ∂v N̄ (τ ) which consists of the smooth
segments of boundary which are also segments of ties; and ∂h N̄ (τ ) which consists of
the remaining segments.
A tie neighbourhood for a generalized pretrack τ on S X may be defined with a
slight generalization of this construction. In this case, if b is a branch of τ which
is not compact and is obtained as the intersection of an edge b̄ of τ̄ with S X , we
define a branch rectangle for b as an embedding Rb : [a, 1 + ε] × [−1, 1] → S̄ X , with
Rb ([a, 1 + ε] × {0}) = b̄, satisfying similar conditions as branch end rectangles, plus
the extra request that Rb ∩ ∂S X = Rb ({a} × [−1, 1]). The generalized definition of
tie neighbourhood continues by revisiting the above constructions in a natural way.
We now define a different version of ‘neighbourhood’ of a pretrack τ : rather than
right-angled corners, this time we want all corners in the boundary to be cusps,
and coinciding with the vertices of τ . Note that the following definition does not
give a genuine neighbourhood of τ ; moreover, if τ is not generic, the interior of this
‘neighbourhood’ may have more connected components than τ .
First of all, when τ is a generic pretrack, there is a natural bijection between
connected components of ∂v N̄ (τ ) and switches of τ . If τ is not generic, instead, for
each connected component of ∂v N̄ (τ ) there is a canonical choice of an associated
switch of τ , but this choice is not injective.
Given any component V of ∂v N̄ (τ ), associated to a switch v of τ , let η1 (V ), η2 (V )
be the two components of ∂h N̄ (τ ) which share an endpoint with V (they may coincide). Let θ1 (V ), θ2 (V ) be two smooth arcs which connect each endpoint of V to v,

28

a.

b.

c.

d.

Figure 2.2: The possible local pictures for a 2-submanifold C ⊆ S around a point of ∂C
which is not smooth. C is shaded in grey. We need to distinguish whether
the angle ∂C forms at that point is convex (a. and b.) or concave (c. and d.);
and whether the two segments delimiting the angle meet tangentially (a. and
d.) or transversely (b. and c.). These are the only two pieces of information
from these local pictures which are invariant under smooth isotopies of S.

are transverse to all ties they encounter, meet τ only at v, and are chosen so that
ηj (V ) ∪ θj (V ) is a smooth arc for j = 1, 2. There is a triangle TV ⊆ N̄ (τ ) whose
edges are V, θ1 (V ), θ2 (V ).
S
We define N0 (τ ) := N (τ ) \ ( V TV ), where the union is over all the connected
components V of ∂v N̄ (τ ). So N0 (τ ) includes the interiors of all branches of τ but
not the switches, which are the corners of ∂ N̄0 (τ ). The smooth segments of ∂ N̄0 (τ )
biject naturally with the connected components of ∂h N̄ (τ ).
One may also define a retraction cτ : N̄ (τ ) → τ as follows. If p ∈ N̄0 (τ ), define
cτ (p) to be the only point of τ contained in the tie along p. If p ∈ TV for a component
V of ∂v N̄ (τ ) as above, instead, we define cτ (p) as cτ (rV (p)): here rV : TV → θ1 (V ) ∪
θ2 (V ) is a retraction whose fibres are transverse to the ties of N̄ (τ ). The map cτ is
called a tie collapse for τ (even though its actual definition is a bit more involved than
what the name suggests).
Given a tie neighbourhood N̄ (τ ) of a pretrack τ in S (resp. S X where X is a
non-peripheral annulus), and σ a subtrack of τ , there exists a tie neighbourhood
N̄ (σ) ⊂ N̄ (τ ) (not unique) such that each tie of N̄ (σ) is a sub-tie of N̄ (τ ), with the
property that: if b ∈ B(τ ) is contained in σ (note that b may not be a branch there)
and has a branch rectangle Rb in N̄ (τ ), then Rb ([−1 + ε, 1 − ε] × [−1, 1]) ⊆ N̄ (σ) and
Rb ([−1 + ε, 1 − ε] × {−1, 1}) ⊆ ∂h N̄ (σ): informally, this property means that ∂ N̄ (σ)
contains (roughly) as much as possible of ∂ N̄ (τ ).
Definition 2.1.3. Let C be a 2-submanifold of a surface (possibly with boundary)
S, such that ∂C is piecewise smooth. With reference to Figure 2.2, we define the

29

index of C as
index(C) := χ(C) − (#corners of type a)/2 − (#corners of type b)/4
+(#corners of type c)/4 + (#corners of type d)/2.
The index is additive: given two submanifolds as above C 0 , C 00 , which only share
a portion of their boundaries, index(C 0 ∪ C 00 ) = index(C 0 ) + index(C 00 ). Note that the
2-submanifolds considered here include, for any pretrack τ , all compact connected
components of N̄ (τ ) and of S \ N (τ ), plus all closures of connected components of
N0 (τ ), and of S \ N̄0 (τ ), which are compact. The possibility of foliating N̄ (τ ) into ties
implies that the index of any of its connected components is 0. Closures of connected
components of N0 (τ ) have zero index, too.
Definition 2.1.4. A compact pretrack τ on a surface S, entirely contained in the
compactification S• , is:
• an almost track if each connected component of S• \ N (τ ) either has negative
index or is a peripheral annulus; and, for each peripheral annulus P among
these, ∂P is isotopic to a closed geodesic of S (i.e. P gives a funnel in S);
• a train track if each connected component of S• \ N (τ ) has negative index;
• a cornered train track if it is a train track and each connected component of
∂ (S \ N (τ )) has a corner.
Note that, on a surface S with finite hyperbolic area, τ is an almost track if and
only if it is a train track, because S has no closed geodesic encircling a puncture. The
reason why we require peripheral annuli in almost tracks to be funnels is to prevent
lifts of a train track from behaving pathologically at infinity (see §2.2.1), and is the
only reason why the hyperbolic structure on S is relevant for us.
Here is another definition which is, in some sense, symmetrical:
Definition 2.1.5. Let S be a surface, even one with boundary. When each connected
component C ⊆ int(S) \ N (τ ), for τ a pretrack is homeomorphic to a disc or a oncepunctured disc, we say that the pretrack fills S.

2.1.2

Carrying

We will have a particular care for arcs and curves ‘contained’ in pretracks and train
tracks:
Definition 2.1.6. A (bounded, infinite, biinfinite, periodic) train path along a pretrack
τ is a smooth immersion f : A → τ , where:
30

• A = [m1 , m2 ], [0, +∞), R or Rm3 Z, respectively, according to the adjective
(m1 , m2 , m3 ∈ Z, with m1 < m2 and m3 > 0);
• f −1 (switches) = A ∩ Z.
Definition 2.1.7. Let τ be a pretrack on a surface S, with N̄ (τ ) a tie neighbourhood;
let σ be another pretrack; let β be a curve or a multicurve; let δ be a properly
embedded arc in N̄ (τ ), with ∂δ = δ ∩ ∂v N̄ (τ ), to be considered up to isotopy leaving
the endpoints fixed.
An inclusion map f : σ (resp. β, δ) ,→ N̄ (τ ), with its image transverse to each
tie it encounters, and ambient isotopic to σ (resp. to β; or isotopic to δ with fixed
endpoints) in S is called a carried realization.
The pretrack σ (resp. the (multi)curve β or arc δ) is carried by τ if it admits a
carried realization.
We will often talk, more loosely, of carried realization referring simply to the image
of f .
The pretrack σ (resp. curve/multicurve β or arc δ) traverses a branch b if im(f ) ∩
αtb

6 ∅ for all t ∈ [−1, 1]. If a (multi)curve or arc β traverses a branch b, the
=
multiplicity of the traversing is the number of points in im(f )∩αtb for any t ∈ [−1, 1] (we

may use expressions like traverses once, twice. . . ). The carrying image of a carrying
injection is the union of the branches of τ which are traversed by σ (resp. β, δ). We
will denote it with τ.σ (τ.β, τ.δ resp.).
A pretrack σ is fully carried if it is carried and τ.σ = τ . It is suited to τ if it is
carried and f : σ ,→ N̄ (τ ) is a homotopy equivalence.
We denote C(τ ) ⊆ C(S) the set of isotopy classes of curves carried by τ .
Definition 2.1.8. Let f : β ,→ N̄ (τ ) be a carried realization of a (multi)curve
β ∈ C(S) in a pretrack τ , as specified in Definition 2.1.7 above. Then f may be
homotoped, keeping each point along the same tie of N̄ (τ ), to a map f 0 whose image
is entirely contained in τ : this new map is not injective anymore, but it is still an
immersion. A suitable reparametrization of f 0 , then, defines a (collection of) periodic
train path(s), which we call a train path realization of β. The image of a train path
realization of β is the carrying image τ.β.
Let now f : δ ,→ N̄ (τ ) be a carried realization of an arc δ in a pretrack τ . Let
V, W be the (possibly coinciding) components of ∂v N̄ (τ ) where the endpoints of δ lie;
v, w be the switches of τ associated with V, W respectively; and αv , αw be the ties of
N̄ (τ ) through v, w respectively. Define δtrim as the longest segment of δ such that f

31

maps its extremes to points of αv , αw respectively; and let ftrim be the restriction of
f to δtrim .
Similarly as above, ftrim may be homotoped, keeping each point along the same
0
tie of N̄ (τ ), to a map ftrim
whose image is entirely contained in τ and can be reparametrized to get a bounded train path along τ . We call the latter, again, a train path
realization of δ; its image is τ.δ.
Remark 2.1.9. If τ is a generic pretrack, then τ is a deformation retract of N̄0 (τ ),
which is in turn a deformation retract of N̄ (τ ). This makes it possible to ask more
— and we will — from a carrying injection f : σ ,→ N̄ (τ ) (or f : β ,→ N̄ (τ ),
f : δ ,→ N̄ (τ )), up to altering f via isotopies which still map each point of σ (resp.
β, δ) along the same tie as f does.
• For a pretrack σ and for a (multi)curve β, we require the image of f to be
contained in N̄0 (τ ). This means that a train path realization of β is obtained
just by reparametrizing cτ ◦ f , while for a pretrack σ we have τ.σ = cτ ◦ f (σ).
• For an embedded arc δ, we require im(f ) ∩ N̄0 (τ ) to be connected. This implies
that, given ftrim as defined above, one gets a train path realization of δ by
reparametrizing cτ ◦ ftrim .
Remark 2.1.10. Let τ, σ be pretracks such that the injection σ ,→ N (τ ) is a carrying map; choose a tie neighbourhood N̄ (σ) ⊆ N̄ (τ ). Then each compact component
of N̄ (τ ) \ N (σ) has zero index.
This is because N̄ (τ ) \ N (σ) can be subdivided into a family of rectangles and
triangles with two (outward) right corners and a cusp; and they both have zero index.
The triangles, in particular, may arise when ∂h N̄ (σ) and ∂h N̄ (τ ) have segments in
common.
In the case of a train track, there is little space available in deciding how to get
something carried: the following statement summarizes Propositions 3.5.2 and 3.6.2
from [Mos03]:
Proposition 2.1.11. Let σ, τ be two train tracks on a surface S, with σ determined
up to isotopies of S. Then, given any two carrying injections f1 , f2 : σ ,→ N̄ (τ ), f1
and f2 are homotopic through carrying injections. The same is true for two carrying
injections of a curve α ∈ C(S) carried by τ . In particular the carrying image τ.σ
or τ.α is uniquely determined, and so is the train path corresponding to α, up to
reparametrization.

32

We will need a slight generalization:
Corollary 2.1.12. Let τ be an almost track on a surface S. Then any two carrying
injections of another almost track σ, or of a curve α ∈ C(S), in N̄ (τ ) are homotopic
through carrying injections.
Proof. Fix two carrying injections f1 , f2 : σ (or α) → N̄ (τ ); then there is a map
h : σ × [0, 1] → S such that h|σ×{0} = f1 and h|σ×{1} = f2 . As the domain of h is
compact, its image also is. Hence there is a union P of peripheral annuli for S, one
for each puncture, disjoint from each other and from im(h) ∪ N̄ (τ ).
Let Σ ∈ P be a finite set of points, one for each connected component; let then
S 0 := S \ Σ. This is a surface on its own, with a hyperbolic metric which is not related
with the one of S. However τ ⊆ S 0 is a train track, as this is a property which is
independent of the metric.
For the case of a carried almost track σ: f1 (σ) ⊆ S 0 is a train track because, if
we pick a tie neighbourhood N (f1 (σ)) ⊆ N (τ ), then any connected component of
S 0 \ N (f1 (σ)) is a gluing of some connected components of S 0 \ N (τ ) (at least one of
them) with some of N̄ (τ ) \ N (f1 (σ)); the latter have zero index because of Remark
2.1.10. Hence S 0 \ N (f1 (σ)) has negative index.
For the case of a carried curve α, f1 (α) ⊂ S 0 is still essential.
The map h serves as a homotopy between f1 and f2 also in S 0 . So, with an application of the above proposition, f1 and f2 are actually homotopic through carrying
injections; hence the same property is true in S.



The set C(τ ), for τ a train track, is ‘generated’ by few curves. To understand this
we need the following notion:
Definition 2.1.13. Let τ be an almost track on a surface S. A transverse measure
on τ is a map µ : B(τ ) → R≥0 with the following property. For each switch v of τ ,
if b is the branch having a large end at v, and b1 , . . . , bm are the branches having a
small end there (we list any of those branches twice if it has both ends there), then
P
µ(b) = m
i=1 µ(bi ). We denote the set of such measures with M(τ ). A transverse
measure can be equally seen as an element of R|B(τ )| . More precisely, the subset C of
R|B(τ )| consisting of transverse measures is a cone with its summit at the origin. Also
define MQ (τ ) := M(τ ) ∩ Q|B(τ )| , i.e. the set of transverse measures which assign a
rational weight to each branch.
Given α ∈ C(τ ) and a train path realization f : α → τ , we can define the
transverse measure µα by setting, for each branch b of τ , µα (b) = number of connected
33

components of f −1 (b) (i.e. the number of times a carried realization of α traverses
b). It is an almost immediate consequence of Proposition 2.1.11 that this measure
depends only on the isotopy class of α.
The following is a simplified version of Theorem 3.7.1 from [Mos03], or Theorem
1.7.7 from [PH91].
Proposition 2.1.14. Let τ be a train track on S. Define1



 m ∈ N;




W M C(τ ) := ((γ1 , a1 ), . . . , (γm , am ))  γj ∈ C(τ ) for all j and are pairwise disjoint;
.


 aj ∈ Q>0 for all j
Let also
Then the map
W M C(τ ) −→ MQ (τ ) \ {0τ }
m
X
{(γ1 , a1 ), . . . , (γm , am )} 7−→
aj µγj
j=1

is a bijection (0τ denotes the zero transverse measure).
Corollary 2.1.15. Let τ be an almost track on S. Then the above map is injective.
Proof. If the given map is not injective, one may find two distinct collections
Pm
0
=
{(γ1 , a1 ), . . . , (γm , am )} and {(γ10 , a01 ), . . . , (γm
such that
0 , am0 )}
j=1 aj µγj
Pm0 0
0
0
0
j=1 aj µγj . Let γ1 , . . . , γm , γ1 , . . . , γm0 be carried realizations of the isotopy classes
0
γ1 , . . . , γm , γ10 , . . . , γm
We repeat the construction seen in the proof of Corollary
0.

2.1.12: let Σ ⊂ S be a finite set consisting of a point for each peripheral annulus
among the components of S \ N̄ (τ ), and let S 0 := S \ Σ. Then τ is a train track in S 0
and the curves γi , γj0 are all essential in S 0 , and carried by τ : we identify them with
their respective classes in CS 0 (τ ) (i.e. the subset of C0 (S 0 ) consisting of all curves
carried by τ ).
For α ∈ CS 0 (τ ), let µ0α be the measure it induces on τ as a train track in S 0 . Then
Pm
Pm0 0 0
0

j=1 aj µγj =
j=1 aj µγ 0 , but this contradicts the above proposition.
j

Definition 2.1.16. Let τ be a train track on a surface S. It is shown that the cone
C specified above is the convex hull of a bounded number of rays. Pick the smallest
such set {r1 , . . . , rl } of rays: each rj will correspond to the real multiples of a single
1

W M C stands for weighted multicurves.

34

µγj , for a γj ∈ C(τ ). We denote V (τ ) = {γ1 , . . . , γl } the vertex set of τ ; an element
of this set is called a vertex cycle.
If τ is an almost track on S, then remove an extra point from each of the components of S \ N (τ ) which are peripheral annuli, to get a surface S 0 . Now τ ⊂ S 0 is a
train track, and has vertex set {γ1 , . . . , γl } ⊆ C(S 0 ). Up to changing their order, we
may suppose that for an index 0 ≤ k ≤ l the curves γk+1 , . . . γl are inessential in S,
while the remaining ones define isotopy classes [γ1 ], . . . , [γk ] ∈ C(S). We define then
V (τ ) := {[γ1 ], . . . , [γk ]}.

2.1.3

More about tracks and curves

Definition 2.1.17. Let τ be any pretrack on a surface S. A carried curve or arc γ
is wide if its carried realization may be given an orientation such that each branch b
is either: traversed by γ at most once; or traversed twice, in such a way that each
segment of γ ∩ Rb appears to the right of the other.
We denote W (τ ) ⊂ C(τ ) the set of wide carried curves of τ .
Note that, for τ an almost track, V (τ ) ⊆ W (τ ) because it is quite easy to decompose µγ into a sum of measures represented by simpler curves if γ is not wide (Lemma
2.8 in [MMS12]).
Lemma 2.1.18. There are bounds N0 , N1 , N2 , C0 depending on S such that, for any
almost track τ , the set W (τ ) has no more than N0 elements and its diameter is no
larger than C0 , τ has at most N1 branches, and S \N (τ ) consists at most N2 connected
components.
For a matter of convenience, we suppose all these bounds to be increasing with
ξ(S) (by enlarging them when necessary).
Proof. Compactness of almost tracks implies that the number of switches and branches
in any of them is finite; and so is the number of connected components of S \ N (τ ).
This means that index(S• ) is the sum of indices of the connected components of

S• \ N (τ ) (because index N̄ (τ ) = 0, as it is a finite gluing of rectangles). These
components all have negative index, except for some peripheral annuli (they are at
most as many as the punctures of S). But this poses an upper bound first of all
on their number, and then also on the number of smooth edges in their boundary.
Eventually, this yields that there is a uniform bound on the number of branches and
of switches of τ , in terms of the topology of S.

35

As a consequence, there are finitely many distinct almost tracks up to diffeomorphisms of S; and the sets of wide curves are equivariant under diffeomorphisms.
The definition of wide curve poses combinatorial constraints yielding that, for each
almost track τ , they are finitely many isotopy classes of them.
These remarks are enough to prove all claims in the statement.



Given a curve γ, carried by a pretrack τ , a wide collar Aγ for γ is an open annulus
Aγ ⊆ S, with compact closure, such that τ.γ constitutes one of the two components
of ∂ Āγ , and the other component is an embedding of S1 belonging to the isotopy class
γ. On top of this, we can require that Aγ does not contain any switch of τ .
A curve γ ∈ C(τ ) has a wide collar if and only if it is wide carried. Suppose first
that γ admits a wide collar Aγ . Then a suitable realization of the core of Aγ , close to
τ.γ, is a carried realization of γ and shows that γ is wide carried. Conversely, if γ is
wide carried, one can always arrange for a carried realization, γ, to have the property
that, for each b ∈ B(τ ) traversed by γ, the segment γ ∩ Rb ([−1, 1] × [−1, 1]) has b
to its right. Then τ.γ and γ bound together a wide collar, obtained as a union of
sub-ties in N (τ ).
There is a notion of canonical realization even for curves which are not carried,
as pointed out in [MMS12]:
Definition 2.1.19. A multicurve γ on S is in efficient position with respect to a train
track τ if γ is embedded in S, transversely to τ , with the following restrictions. Let
N (γ) be a regular neighbourhood of γ containing no corners of ∂ N̄ (τ ).
• the chosen embedding of γ does not include any switch of τ ;
• for each branch b, the intersection of γ ∩ Rb (when nonempty) is a collection of
ties, or it is transverse to all ties (in this latter case we say that b is traversed
by γ, similarly as for carried multicurves);
• for each connected component C of S• \ N (τ ), each connected component of
C \ N (γ) either has negative index or is a rectangle.
Such a multicurve is wide if, moreover, there is a choice for the orientation of its
components with the following properties.
• If b is a branch such that γ traverses Rb transversally to the ties, γ ∩ Rb is either
a single segment, or two segments each appearing to the right of the other.
• Fix any component C of S• \ N (τ ), and any two points P1 , P2 of γ ∩ ∂C which
are consecutive along ∂C. Let α1 , α2 be the connected components of γ ∩ C the
two points belong to. Then either α1 = α2 or, with the given orientations on γ,
α1 , α2 appear to the right of each other.
36

Carried realizations of curves and arcs are a particular case of efficient position;
the opposite extreme case is the following. An arc or curve γ ∈ AC(S) is dual to
a pretrack τ if is (isotopic to one) in efficient position, with no branch b such that
im(Rb ) is traversed transversally to the ties. We denote C∗ (τ ) ⊂ C(S) the set of
curves in S which are dual to τ .
Definition 2.1.20. An almost track τ is recurrent if for each branch b of τ is traversed
by a periodic train path in τ . Note that, for τ a train track, this is equivalent to saying
that each branch is traversed by some carried curve of τ .
The track τ is transversely recurrent if if for each branch b of τ there is a dual curve
γ intersecting b.
The track is birecurrent if it both recurrent and transversely recurrent.
It can be shown (see [PH91], §1.3) that a train track τ is recurrent if and only
if there is a carried multicurve whose carrying image is the entire τ . Similarly, τ is
transversely recurrent if and only if there is a family of pairwise disjoint simple closed
loops in S, dual to τ , possibly including isotopic pairs, and such that, for each branch
b ∈ B(τ ), one of the specified realizations intersects b.
One of the main theorems in [MMS12] is that efficient position always exists under
some mild conditions on the train track (Theorem 4.1):
Theorem 2.1.21. Let τ be a birecurrent, cornered train track on S; and let γ ⊂ C(S)
be a multicurve. Then γ has an isotopy representative in efficient position with τ .
Given two different realizations γ1 , γ2 of γ in efficient position, they can be transformed into each other via a finite sequence of elementary operations (described in
the original statement).

2.1.4

Elementary moves

Some alterations of pretracks are considered to be elementary moves. We describe
them in Figures 2.3 and 2.4, referring to §3.12 and 3.13 of [Mos03] for formal definitions.
+∞
Definition 2.1.22. A sequence of almost tracks τ = (τj )N
j=0 , N ∈ N, or (τj )j=0 ,

with all τj lying on the same surface S is a splitting sequence if, for all 0 ≤ j < N ,
τj+1 is obtained from τj via a comb, uncomb or split move. In the case of generic
almost tracks, instead, we require each element of the sequence to be obtained from
the previous one via a slide or a split (we may use the adjective generic in reference

37

a
b

a
b

c

c

Figure 2.3: The upper picture represents a comb move in a semigeneric pretrack; this
move, in particular, shrinks a mixed branch to a point. The inverse of a comb
move will be called uncomb. The notion of comb move does not make sense
in the setting of generic train track, where it is replaced by the one of slide,
depicted in the lower picture: given a mixed branch, its large end ‘moves past’
the small end, and in so doing it replaces the old mixed branch with a new
one. The effect of a slide can be cancelled, up to isotopy, with a further slide.

Figure 2.4: A split is an elementary move acting on a large branch. The easiest case is
the one of the central split (middle arrow) which is intuitively understood as
cutting along the large branch with a pair of scissor; the scissors enter a branch
end from the gap between two small branches, and exit on the opposite side
through a similar gap. The two copies of the split branch may be connected
via a ‘diagonal’ new branch: if the latter is placed as shown in the top arrow,
we speak of a right split; if it is as in the bottom arrow, it will be called a
left split. Left and right splits are collectively called parity splits. In a more
neutral way, we will refer to the property of a split being left, right or central
also as its parity ; but we will not generate confusion.

38

to splitting sequences, too, in order to mark this difference). We denote with |τ | the
number of splits the splitting sequence τ includes.
Given two indices 0 ≤ k ≤ l (≤ N ), we denote by τ (k, l) = (τj )lj=k the splitting
sequence obtained from τ by considering only the entries indexed by the indices
between k and l. When referring to splitting sequences, we use the term subsequence
only to refer to a sequence τ (k, l) i.e. a subsequence never skips intermediate entries.
Given two splitting sequences σ and τ , with the last entry of σ isotopic to the
first entry of τ , we denote by σ ∗ τ the splitting sequence obtained by adjoining the
entries of τ at the end of σ, in the given order and excluding the first one (so as not
to have a repetition).
Note that any semigeneric train track can be converted into a generic one via
some uncomb moves. Actually, a splitting sequence of semigeneric train tracks can
be converted into a splitting sequence of generic ones (i.e. not only each track may be
made generic, but comb and uncomb moves may be replaced with slides in a suitable
manner), and vice versa.
Combs, uncombs and slides are to be regarded as invertible and unessential moves,
whereas splits in some sense ‘downgrade’ the train track; this is made precise by the
following statement, which collects Propositions 3.12.2 and 3.14.1 from [Mos03]:
Proposition 2.1.23. Given two train tracks τ, τ 0 on a surface S, τ 0 is fully carried
by τ if and only if τ and τ 0 are, respectively, the beginning and the end of a splitting
sequence.
Moreover, τ 0 is suited to τ if and only if τ and τ 0 are, respectively, the beginning
and the end of a splitting sequence with no central splits.
Finally, τ 0 and τ carry each other if and only if τ and τ 0 are the extremes of a
splitting sequence with no splits.
Remark 2.1.24. If a pretrack τ 0 is carried by another pretrack τ , one can pick tie
neighbourhoods N (τ 0 ) ⊆ N (τ ), with the ties of the former obtained as restriction of
the ones of the latter. As a consequence, any curve that is carried by τ 0 is also carried
by τ : C(τ 0 ) ⊆ C(τ ). In the case of almost tracks, where uniqueness of carrying
holds, given any α ∈ C(τ 0 ) and the transverse measures µ0α , µα induced by it on τ 0 , τ
respectively, we have maxb∈B(τ 0 ) (µ0α (b)) ≤ maxb∈B(τ ) (µα (b)) and minb∈B(τ 0 ) (µ0α (b)) ≤
minb∈B(τ ) (µα (b)).
The above proposition, then, implies that the sequence of sets (C(τj ))j along a
splitting sequence is decreasing; and the equality C(τj ) = C(τj+1 ) holds every time
39

the two tracks are obtained from each other with an elementary move which is not a
split.
Remark 2.1.25. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a train track splitting sequence.
• If τN is recurrent then so are all entries of τ .
• If τ0 is transversely recurrent then so are all entries of τ (cfr. [PH91], Lemma
1.3.3(b)).
Remark 2.1.26. After introducing almost tracks and elementary moves, we can
finally fix the parameters k = k(S), ` = `(S) employed in the definitions of M+ (S)
and the quasi-pants graph P+ (S), as promised after Remark 1.2.11.
Here are the choices in detail for P+ (S). We let k 0 be the maximum self-intersection
number of a collection V (τ ) over all almost tracks τ on S (which is finite because
almost tracks are finitely many different ones up to diffeomorphisms of S; see also
Lemma 2.1.18), and we let k(S) := k 0 . This means that an almost track vertex set is
a vertex of P+ (S) if and only if it cuts S as specified in either of the conditions a),
b), c) of Definition 1.2.10.
As for the choice of `, let `0 be the maximum intersection number between V (τ )
and V (σ), for τ any almost track and σ obtained from τ with a split or taking
a subtrack (this is again finite because all possible pairs are finitely many up to
diffeomorphism). Then define ` := max{`0 , `1 } for `1 the one defined in Remark
1.2.11: this means that a splitting of almost tracks induces a displacement along an
edge in P+ (S).
When X ⊆ S is a non-annular subsurface, we would like that, every time V (τ )
is a vertex of P+ (S), πX V (τ ) is a vertex of P+ (X): so it will be understood that,
when X is regarded as a subsurface of S, then the bound on self-intersection number
for vertices of P+ (X) is not taken to be k(X) but k(X, S) := max{k(X), 4k(S) + 4}
instead (this works, because of Remark 1.2.5).
The choices for M+ (S) shall be made with the same spirit: given any train track,
if its vertex set fills S then it must be a vertex of the graph. The vertex sets of any
pair of train tracks related via an elementary move must be represented by vertices at
distance ≤ 1; and any vertex must have distance ≤ 1 from a complete clear marking.
Again, we wish also that, when X ⊆ S is a non-annular subsurface and V (τ ) is a
vertex of M+ (S), then also πX V (τ ) is a vertex of M+ (X). So, when X is regarded as
a subsurface of S, we pick a bound for the self-intersection number differently from
the case in which X is a stand-alone surface.

40

These choices for M+ (S) and M+ (X) do not coincide with the ones given at the
beginning of §6 in [MMS12] as they give higher constants, but they do not alter the
validity of the results in that work, and in particular of their Theorem 6.1, as we will
see.

2.2

Train tracks: more constructions

2.2.1

Lifting and inducing an almost track

If τ is an almost track on S, and X ⊆ S is a subsurface, we denote with τ X the
pre-image of τ in S X ; it is a pretrack. The universal cover of S will be denoted S̃;
similarly, the notation τ̃ will denote the pre-image of τ in S̃ via the covering map
S̃ → S.
Remark 2.2.1. All connected components of S X \ N (τ X ) or of S̃ \ τ̃ which are
compact have negative index.
The best way to see this (focusing on S X \ N (τ X ), as the case of the universal
cover is identical) is to take σ an almost track which fills S, has τ as a subtrack,
and has the property that each connected component of S \ N (σ) which is a smooth
peripheral annulus is also a connected component of S \ N (τ ).
Each compact connected component of S X \ N (σ X ) which is not a smooth peripheral annulus, then, is diffeomorphic to a suitable connected component of S \N (σ);
as such, it has negative index.
So the compact connected components of S X \ N (τ X ) are obtained from gluing a
handful of negative index components of S X \N (σ X ) with, possibly, some components
as in Remark 2.1.10. So they have negative index.
Some adaptations of the results from §3.3 in [Mos03] will be now given, to rule
the behaviour of τ̃ and τ X at infinity.
Proposition 2.2.2. Let τ be an almost track on a surface S. Then
• all train paths along τ̃ are embedded;
• the images of any two train paths in τ̃ intersect in a connected set.
Proposition 2.2.3. In the same setting as the above proposition,
• if ρ, ρ0 are two infinite train paths which have finite Haudorff distance in S̃, then
they eventually coincide;
• if ρ, ρ0 are two biinfinite train paths which have finite Haudorff distance in S̃,
then they coincide entirely.
41

The proof of these two propositions are exactly the same as Propositions 3.3.1
and 3.3.2 in [Mos03].
Proposition 2.2.4. Let τ be an almost track on a surface S. Then there exists λ ≥ 1
(depending on τ ) such that every train path in τ̃ is a λ-quasigeodesic in S̃ ∼
= H2 with
the hyperbolic metric.
Proof (Sketch). The proof of this statement is substantially the same as the proof
of Proposition 3.3.3 in [Mos03]. Rather than repeating their proof, we give some
instructions to adapt it to our setting.
Replace τ with an almost track which fills S, has the original τ as a subtrack, and
chosen so that the collection of funnels with smooth boundary appearing as connected
components of S \N (τ ) remains unvaried. By isotoping τ , make sure that τ ⊆ core(S)
and that the closure of each connected component of core(S) \ τ is a closed disc. This
request is equivalent to demanding that τ ∪ ∂core(S) is a connected pretrack on S,
entirely contained in core(S).
Let K̃ be the preimage of core(S) in the universal cover S̃: it is connected and
convex, by definition of core(S). The same arguments as in the proof of Proposition
3.3.3 in [Mos03] can be used to show that:
• if core(S) is compact, then τ̃ is quasi-isometric to K̃;
• if core(S) has punctures, then there exists a pretrack σ ∞ ⊆ K̃ which contains
τ̃ as a subtrack and is quasi-isometric to K̃.
After that, one proves that any train path δ in τ̃ is a quasigeodesic, following the
original proof verbatim.



As a consequence:
Corollary 2.2.5. Let τ be an almost track on a surface S and let X ⊆ S be a
subsurface. Every infinite train path in τ X with noncompact image, and every infinite
train path in τ̃ , has a unique limit point on ∂S X (∂ S̃, resp.).
If two paths as above have the same limit point, then they eventually coincide.
A biinfinite train path in τ̃ has distinct endpoints on ∂ S̃, and there are no two
distinct paths with the same pair of endpoints.
Proof. All the statements concerning train paths in τ̃ are easy consequences of the
above propositions.
As for an infinite path ρ in τ X with noncompact image: let π1 (X) ∼
= ΓX < Isom(S̃)
be the group such that S X = S̃/ΓX . Let P be a disjoint, ΓX -equivariant union of an
42

open horoball for each point of ∂ S̃ which is parabolic under the action of ΓX , and
with the property that τ X ∩ P = ∅: (H(LΓX ) \ P ) /ΓX is a compact surface with
boundary.
Let ρ̃ be any lift of ρ to S̃: ρ̃ is a quasigeodesic in S̃, as seen in the previous
proposition. If its endpoint at infinity belongs to the limit set LΓX then there is an
ε > 0 such that ρ̃, with the exception of an initial segment, falls entirely in the closed
neighbourhood N := N̄ε (H(LΓX )). Therefore ρ lies eventually in the compact set
(N \ P )/ΓX , which means that it is compact itself.
So the endpoint at infinity of ρ̃ belongs to the domain of discontinuity DΓX ; let Ã
be an open neighbourhood of this point such that Ã ∩ S̃ gets mapped isometrically
via the covering map S̃ ∪DΓX → S X ; and let A be its image in S X . Then ρ∩A, which
excludes only an initial segment of ρ, is a quasigeodesic in S X , and has a unique limit
point on ∂S X .
If two infinite paths ρ, ρ0 in τ X with noncompact image approach the same endpoint in ∂S X , then one may choose lifts ρ̃, ρ̃0 to S̃ which also approach the same point

in ∂ S̃, and so they eventually coincide. But then, ρ, ρ0 also do.
Remark 2.2.6. If τ carries τ 0 , then all train paths in (τ 0 )X are carried by τ X , too.
In particular, the set of points of ∂S X which are endpoints for some infinite,
noncompact train path in (τ 0 )X is a subset of the similarly defined set for τ X .
The concept of subsurface projection finds a version for train tracks in [MMS12].
Before we introduce it, we need a slight generalization of Definition 2.1.7. If X is an
annular subsurface of a surface S and β ∈ C(X), a carried realization f : β ,→ N̄ (τ X )
is specified by the same hypotheses as in the definition of carried realization of a curve,
plus the extra one that the endpoints of f (β) in ∂S X are the same as the ones of β.
This gives sense to the adjective carried, hence to the notation C(τ X ) for the subset
of C0 (X) consisting of all arcs carried by τ X . We can adapt similarly the content of
Definition 2.1.8 to speak of a train path realization of an arc β carried by τ X .
Definition 2.2.7. Given τ an almost track on a surface S and X ⊆ S a subsurface,
the track induced by τ on X is τ |X, the subtrack of τ X consisting of those branches
belonging to the carrying image of some element of C(τ X ).
Note that C(τ |X) = C(τ X ) and that, if X is not an annulus, then C(τ |X) =
C(τ ) ∩ C0 (S X ) = C(τ ) ∩ C0 (X). If X is an annulus, then each element of C(τ )
which intersects X essentially lifts to an element of C(τ |X), but it is not true in
general that an element of C(τ |X) projects to an element of C(τ ).
43

Following [MMS12], we define V (τ |X) ⊂ C(τ |X) to be the set of wide carried
arcs. Again, the definition of wide carried arc here is not any different from the
definition of wide carried curve in an almost track.
Lemma 2.2.8. If X is not an annulus, then the induced track τ |X is an almost
track on S X . Moreover, if r : S X → core(S X ) = X ∩ core(S) is a retraction, then
r(τ |X) =: ρ is a pretrack contained in int(X) which is an almost track in S, too.
Let p : S X → S be the covering map. In the statement we have already implicitly
identified p−1 (X) with X, and core(S X ) with X ∩ core(S), using the fact that these
pairs are isometric via p. As it is noted in [MMS12], Lemma 3.1 and subsequent
remarks, τ |X need not be a train track when τ is.
Proof. We prove directly that ρ is an almost track in S X ; clearly this will mean that
τ |X is, too. Also, we may suppose that X has geodesic boundary2 .
We claim that the compact connected components of core(S X ) \ N (ρ) either have
negative index or are compact peripheral annuli in X. If one of these components,
C say, were not either of these two alternatives, then index(C) ≥ 0 and C would lie
away from ∂core(S X ). But then, consider r−1 (C): it would be contained in S X , hence
it would be a compact connected component of S X \ N (τ X ). So index (r−1 (C)) < 0,
because it would be the gluing of patches as in Remark 2.2.1 plus other ones ruled
by Remark 2.1.10. This is a contradiction.
We will now exclude that core(S X ) \ N (ρ) includes a connected component which
is a cusp P with smooth boundary ∂P . If there is one, then there are a periodic train
path in ρ, and one in τ |X, which (up to the due reparametrization) are isotopic to
∂P ; necessarily, there is no closed geodesic in S X which is isotopic to ∂P .

There is a chain of inclusions of closed subsets p(P ) ⊆ p core(S X ) ⊆ core(S) ⊆ S

(again, remember that p(P ) ∼
= P and p core(S X ) ∼
= core(S X )); note that there
cannot be any closed geodesic in S which is isotopic to ∂p(P ), either.
On the other hand, ∂P = p(∂P ) is also an embedded loop in S, isotopic to a
(reparametrized) train path along p(τ X ) ⊆ τ . However, since τ is an almost track, is
does not admit periodic train paths encircling cusps, hence a contradiction.
The argument carried out so far proves that any smooth connected component of
∂ N̄ (ρ) which is inessential in core(S X ) (which is the same as saying, inessential in
2

If X has two isotopic boundary components in S, their geodesic representatives end up coinciding. But this is no cause for concern, as the boundary components of X ⊆ S X are pairwise not
isotopic.

44

S X ) is parallel to a closed geodesic, one of the connected components of ∂core(S X ).
This means that ρ is an almost track in S X , and so is τ |X.
Now we prove that p(ρ) (which can be identified with ρ itself) is an almost track
on S. Each connected component of S \ p (N (ρ)) is either contained in X and, in this
case, it is a copy of a connected component of p−1 (X) \ N (ρ); or it contains entirely
a closed geodesic, a connected component of ∂X. None of these complementary
components may transgress the conditions that make p(ρ) an almost track in S.



Remark 2.2.9. Let γ ∈ C(S), let X be a regular neighbourhood of γ and let τ be
an almost track on S. We list here a few basic facts about the induced track τ |X.
1. If γ admits a carried realization in τ |X then it admits one in τ . Note, though,
that the first one is certainly embedded as a train path (see below), whereas
the latter need not be. The converse is not true in general: if γ is carried by τ
but C(τ X ) = ∅ then γ is not carried by τ |X. On the other hand, as we note
in point 8 below, γ is carried by τ |X if C(τ X ) 6= ∅.
2. When γ is carried by τ X , it is embedded as a train path. The realization as a
train path is unique up to obvious reparametrizations.
Uniqueness of carrying of γ provided the existence of a carried realization is
just a consequence of the uniqueness of carrying of γ in τ (Corollary 2.1.12).
We prove that the train path realization of γ is embedded by contradiction.
Suppose first that τ X .γ is not a simple curve: then (forgetting about it being
a pretrack) it is a compact 1-complex with two or more distinct simple cycles.
As S X is a planar surface, this means that S X \ N (τ X .γ) consists of at least
3 connected components. Considering that τ X .γ keeps away from ∂S X , and
that γ is not nullhomotopic in S X , two of these components include each one
component of ∂S X and are topological annuli, possibly with a bunch of outward
right angles in their boundaries. So their index is not positive.
Any other connected component C is also a compact connected component of
S X \ N (τ X .γ), and it must have index(C) < 0 because it is a gluing of regions
as in Remarks 2.2.1 and 2.1.10. This means that S X is a gluing of regions with
index ≤ 0, and one of them has certainly index < 0. But this is impossible since
index(S X ) = 0.
So τ X .γ is a simple curve, not nullhomotopic in S X . If γ traversed any branch
there more than once, it would traverse at least twice all of them, and always
keeping the same orientation. But this means that γ would not be a generator
for π1 (S X ), thus it contradicts the definition of X.
Before we continue with more observations, we give a definition:
45

Definition 2.2.10. Let τ be an almost track, let γ ∈ C(S) and let X be a
regular neighbourhood of γ. Suppose that γ is carried by τ (and by τ X ) and
that e is a branch end of τ X such that e ∩ τ X .γ = {v}, where v is the switch of
τ X which serves as endpoint of e. Consider a train path β in τ X which traverses
the branch containing e pointing towards v, and then follows γ until it reaches
v again. The e-orientation on γ is the orientation specified by the path β.
3. Uniqueness of carrying on τ X for an element α ∈ C(τ X ) holds, similarly as for
train tracks and almost tracks.
It is enough to show that there is only one train path realization of α, up to
reparametrization. Let then α1 , α2 be two train path realizations of α: they
have the same endpoints on ∂S X . Consider each of these two realizations as
the union of two infinite train paths approaching opposite components of ∂S X :
then, by Corollary 2.2.5, they coincide outside a compact subset of S X .
Since α1 , α2 are homotopic arcs, there are lifts α̃1 , α̃2 of the two on S̃ which
approach the same pair of points at infinity. By Corollary 2.2.5 α̃1 , α̃2 must
coincide, and so do α1 , α2 .
4. Let α ∈ C(τ X ). If α traverses at least one of the branches of τ X twice, then γ
is carried by τ X and all branches traversed more than once by α must belong to
τ X .γ.
The carrying image τ X .α is a generalized pretrack. Among the connected components of S X \N (τ X .α) there is no topological closed disc: if there is one, which
we call D, then lift α to an arc α̃ in S̃. This is homotopic, with fixed extremes,
to a biinfinite train path along τ̃ : let τ̃ .α̃ be its image. D lifts homeomorpically
to a connected component of S̃ \ N (τ̃ .α̃); but the presence of a topological disc
among them is a contradiction to Proposition 2.2.2, according to which train
paths along τ̃ are embedded.
Encircle each component of ∂S X with a smooth loop which intersects N (τ X .α)
in exactly one tie. Let Y be the compact annulus delimited by these two loops
in S X . As a consequence of the previous paragraph, each connected component
of Y \ N (τ X .α) includes part of ∂Y \ N (τ X .α), which consists of exactly 2
components. The connected components of Y \ N (τ X .α), then, are at most 2.

If Y \N (τ X .α) is connected, then index Y \ N (τ X .α) = 0, by index additivity

since index(Y ) = index N̄ (τ X .α) = 0. This means that Y \ N (τ X .α) is a
rectangle i.e. ∂ N̄ (τ X .α) consists of two smooth components, and they are both
isotopic to α: so α will be embedded.

46

If, instead, the components of Y \ N (τ X .α) are two, then each of them is

necessarily homeomorphic to a disc. So (τ X .α) ∩ Y ∪ ∂Y is a 3-valent graph,
hence with the property that 2#(edges) = 3#(vertices), which cuts the annulus
Y into two cells.
Computation of the Euler characteristic yields that the graph has 6 edges and 4
vertices. This implies that τ X .α is a generalized pretrack with two switches, two
compact branches, and two more branches heading towards the two opposite
components of ∂S X .

Figure 2.5: The only possibility for τ X .α (Remark 2.2.9, point 4) provided that α does
not have an embedded realization as a train path, up to a diffeomorphism of
S X (possibly an orientation-reversing one). The arc α may wind around the
core curve an arbitrarily high number of times.

There is only one diffeomorphism type of generalized pretrack in S X with these
properties and that carries a path from one component of ∂S X to the other,
traversing all branches of the pretrack: τ X .α must belong to this class (Figure
2.5). So τ X .α, in particular, carries γ.
Necessarily α, after traversing the first infinite branch of τ X .α, winds around
τ X .γ traversing each branch always in the same direction, and eventually leaves
it to traverse the remaining infinite branch of τ X .α.
The structure of an arc α ∈ C(τ X ) when γ is carried can therefore be summarized as follows.
5. Suppose that τ X carries γ. Let α ∈ C(τ X ) and let α be a realization of α
as a train path along τ X . Then α consists of the concatenation of three segments ρ1 , β, ρ2 such that: β traverses branches of (τ |X).γ, always in the same
direction; ρ1 and ρ2 are embedded train paths, connecting τ X .γ with distinct
components of ∂S X and not traversing any branch in τ X .γ. The branch ends of
ρ1 ρ2 which are adjacent to τ X .γ induce opposite orientations on γ.
We will denote β = hs(τ, α) and call it the horizontal stretch of α in τ . We
have that α ∈ V (τ X ) if and only if hs(τ, α) is embedded. In this case we may
47

abusively identify hs(τ, α) with its image τ X .γ ∩ τ X .α.
The paths ρ1 , ρ2 also deserve a name. When τ X carries γ, we call an outgoing
ramp a train path ρ : [0, +∞) → τ X such that ρ(0) ∈ τ X .γ, and converging to
a point in ∂S X without traversing any branch in τ X .γ. An ingoing ramp is a
train path ρ : (−∞, 0] → τ X such that the map ρ0 (x) := ρ(−x) is an outgoing
ramp.
6. Suppose two distinct outgoing ramps for τ X diverge towards the same point of
∂S X . Then their initial branch ends give opposite orientations to γ.
Let ρ1 , ρ2 : [0, +∞) → τ X be the two ramps. By Corollary 2.2.5 they eventually
coincide so the subtrack σ = (τ X .γ)∪im(ρ1 )∪im(ρ2 ) has, among the components
of S X \ N (σ), a compact component which is a compact topological disc. It
has at least two outward corners in the boundary — at the confluence of ρ1 , ρ2
— but, as it is a union of components as in Remarks 2.1.10 and 2.2.1, its index
is negative and the corners in the boundary must be at least three more. This
is possible only if it has corners both at ρ1 (0) and at ρ2 (0), which means that
their initial branch ends induce opposite orientations on γ.
7. The elements of V (τ X ) are exactly the ones of C(τ X ) which are embedded as
train paths and, if τ |X does not carry γ, then V (τ |X) = C(τ |X) (cfr. Lemma
3.5 in [MMS12]). If τ |X carries γ then, for any α ∈ C(τ |X), there exist
m
(β). Here DX is the self-diffeomorphism
β ∈ V (τ |X), m ∈ Z, such that α = DX
of S X given by the Dehn twist about its core curve γ.
The first sentence is just a direct consequence of point 4 above. As for the
second one: consider the decomposition given in the above point. So α fails to
be wide carried if and only if hs(τ, α) is not an embedded train path, and this
occurs if and only if it traverses all branches of τ X .γ. But then one between
−1
DX (α) and DX
(α) traverses each branch of τ X .γ once less than α. Repeat

Dehn twisting until the arc thus obtained has an embedded horizontal stretch.
8. A similar argument as in the point above yields a weaker form for the missing
implication in point 1: if γ is carried by τ (hence by τ X , too) and C(τ X ) 6= ∅
then γ is carried by τ |X. Given any α ∈ C(τ X ) then, up to replacing α with
±1
the correct DX
(α) ∈ C(τ X ), we can suppose that it traverses all branches of

τ X .γ. So those branches are part of τ |X.
9. Given any two α1 , α2 ∈ V (τ |X), i := i(α1 , α2 ) ≤ 4 — hence dC(X) (α1 , α2 ) ≤ 5.
Consider any two carried realizations α1 , α2 which realize the intersection number i between their isotopy classes; we identify them with their images in S X .
We may suppose that i > 0. Perform a series of isotopies on α1 , α2 , transversely
48

to the ties of N (τ |X), resulting in two new realizations α01 , α02 . These isotopies
shall be performed in such a way that each transverse intersection between α1
and α2 turns into an entire segment of intersection between α01 and α02 , without
introducing new connected components of intersection. Informally, we may say
that the local picture around each component of α01 ∩ α02 is the same as the one
around a large branch in a pretrack.
Let then σ := α01 ∪ α02 : it is a generalized pretrack, carried by τ |X. It has
no mixed branches: the existence of one would imply that one of the two arcs
traverses some branch of τ |X more than once and this contradicts the fact
that they are embedded as train paths. Fix a tie neighbourhood N̄ (σ) ⊆
N (τ |X): then each compact connected component C of S X \ N (σ) has negative
index because, as α1 , α2 traverse each branch of τ |X at most once and we
have chosen representatives which intersect minimally, C includes at least one
compact component of S X \ N (τ |X); Remarks 2.1.10 and 2.2.1 apply. So this
means that, if a component of S X \σ has compact closure, then it is a topological
disc and contains at least three outward cusps in its boundary.
Now, (α01 ∪ α02 ∪ ∂Y ) ∩ Y as a graph has 2i + 4 vertices (out of which 4 lie along
∂Y and the others are switches), and they are all trivalent. The edges of the
graph are i + 2(i + 1) + 4 (here they are counted as large branches + small
branches + edges ∂Y is cut into). By an Euler characteristic computation, this
graph cuts Y into i + 2 regions, each homeomorphic to a disc. Out of these,
exactly 4 have an edge along ∂Y ; so the remaining i − 2 ones are identifiable
with the connected components of S X \ σ with compact closure.
We have noted that each of these latter regions has at least 3 outward cusps
in its boundary; moreover, out of the four regions which are adjacent to ∂Y ,
exactly two must contain an outward cusp. In total, the number of outward
cusps in N̄0 (σ) is 2i, because each large branch of σ provides two of them. Hence
2i ≥ 3(i − 2) + 2 and i ≤ 4.
Lemma 2.2.11. Let τ be an almost track on S. Then the subsurface S 0 of S — not
necessarily a connected one, and possibly including annular components — filled by
the curves in V (τ ) is also the subsurface filled by C(τ ).
Moreover, if C 1 , . . . , C k are the connected components of S 0 then, for each i such
that C i is non-annular, V (τ |C i ) = V (τ ) ∩ C(C i ).
Proof. Step 1: case of τ a train track.

49

Use the notation τ ki to mean τ |C i if C i is not an annulus, and the core curve of
S

Ci

otherwise.
i

We identify each C i with its homeomorphic copy in S C : this copy is a deformation
retract of S C i . With this convention, for each v ∈ V (τ ) there is exactly one i = i(v)
such that C i contains a curve isotopic to v, and this curve either is essential there
(for C i not an annulus) or is the core curve (for C i an annulus). Also, v is carried by
i(v)

the respective τ ki(v), enforcing the identification C(S C ) = C(C i(v) ).
i
i
For each 1 ≤ i ≤ k, let Y i ⊂ S C be a surface (not an essential subsurface of S C
according to the definition used so far), defined as follows:
• if C i is not an annulus, fix a collection of peripheral annuli in S C , one for each
i

topological puncture, disjoint from each other and from N̄ (τ ki); and remove
one point from each of them (similarly as it is done in Corollary 2.1.12);
• if C i is an annulus, remove one point from each connected component of C i \τ ki.
Let τ i = τ ki setwise, but considered as a train track on Y i . Then we may identify
MQ (τ i ) = MQ (τ ki) and there is a natural, linear map f i : MQ (τ i ) → MQ (τ ).
For each element v ∈ V (τ ), τ i(v) carries a unique curve ṽ, essential in Y i(v) , such
that the chain of natural maps Y i(v) ,→ S C

i(v)

 int(C i(v) ) ,→ S sends ṽ to a loop

homotopic to v.
For each α ∈ C(τ ) we denote µα the corresponding measure in MQ (τ ); while,
for β ∈ C(τ i ), we denote νβi the corresponding measure in MQ (τ i ) (see Definition
i(v)

2.1.13). For all v ∈ V (τ ), f i(v) (νṽ ) = µv , implying in particular that ṽ ∈ V (τ i(v) ): if
i(v)

νṽ

could be written nontrivially as a sum in MQ (τ i ), then also µv could be written

nontrivially as a sum in in MQ (τ ). If C i(v) is not an annulus then, by definition of
i(v)
i(v)
i(v), v ∈ C(τ ki(v)) and νv = νṽ under the identification MQ (τ i ) = MQ (τ ki), so
v ∈ V (τ ki(v)). In particular this proves the inclusion V (τ ki) ⊇ V (τ ) ∩ C(C i ) for all
1 ≤ i ≤ k such that C i is not an annulus.
P
Fix now α ∈ C(τ ); then in MQ (τ ) there is an equality µα = v∈V (τ ) av µv for
P
P
av ∈ Q≥0 ; note that µα = ki=1 f i (ν i ) where ν i ∈ MQ (τ i ), ν i = v∈V (τ ) s.t. i(v)=i av νṽ .
As a consequence of Proposition 2.1.14, for each 1 ≤ i ≤ k it is also possible to
P
i
i
i
i
i
write ν i = s(i)
j=1 cj νβji for cj ∈ Q>0 and {β1 , . . . , βs } ⊂ C(τ ) a family of pairwise
disjoint curves. But each train path realization β ij of βji in τ i is also a train path in
τ ki; as such, it is homotopic to an embedded loop β̂ji , entirely contained in C i , and
possibly homotopic into a puncture of C i .
i

The covering map p̂i : S C → S turns this into a homotopy in S. So each p̂i (β̂ji ),
which can be considered to coincide with β̂ji , is a simple closed curve in S, homotopic
to the periodic train path p̂i (β ij ) along τ i . Also, p̂i (β̂ji ) is an essential curve in S,
50

as no train path in τ , which is a train track, may represent a null-homotopic or
puncture-homotopic curve.
For each i, j, let αji be the isotopy class of p̂(β̂ji ). This defines a family of isotopy
classes of curves in S which are admit pairwise disjoint realizations, and each of
P
them may be supposed to lie entirely in the respective C i . So µα = ki=1 f i (ν i ) =
Pk Ps(i) i
i=1
j=1 cj µαij . The bijection guaranteed by Proposition 2.1.14, then, implies that
this double summation has only one entry, identical to the original µα . This implies
that α is contained in S 0 , so C(τ ) fills S 0 as well as V (τ ).
If α ∈ V (τ ki) for C i not an annulus, suppose that α 6∈ V (τ ). Anyway α ∈
C(τ ), and the argument above proves, in particular, that in the expression µα =
P
i
v∈V (τ ) av µv the coefficients av 6= 0 all have the same i(v) =: i. But then να =
P
v∈V (τ )∩C(C i ) av νv implying that only one av 6= 0 because α is a vertex cycle for τ ki.
So V (τ ki) ⊆ V (τ ) ∩ C(C i ).
Step 2: τ is only an almost track on S.
Similarly as above, let T be the surface obtained from S by picking a collection
P of peripheral annuli, one for each topological puncture, disjoint from each other
and from N̄ (τ ), and removing one point from each of them. Then τT = τ is a train
track on T , and C(τT ) and V (τT ) fill the same, possibly disconnected, subsurface T 0
of T ; up to isotopies, we may suppose that, every time a connected component of
∂T 0 is isotopic to one of ∂P , they actually coincide. Let then T 00 be the subsurface of
S consisting of all connected components of T 0 ∪ P which are not peripheral annuli.
There is a natural bijection between the connected components of T 0 and the ones of
T 00 , and we claim that T 00 is the subsurface of S filled by both V (τ ) and C(τ ).
By definition, V (τ ) may be identified with the subset of V (τT ) consisting of all
curves in this latter set which are not homotopically trivial in S; i.e. the ones that
are not homotopic to a connected component of ∂P . An application of the same idea
as in the proof of Corollary 2.1.12 guarantees that, among these elements of V (τT ),
no two distinct ones become isotopic in S. Fix an embedding in T 0 for all elements
in V (τT ).
We prove first that, given any curve α ∈ C(T 00 ) ⊆ C(S) there is an element of
V (τ ) that intersects it essentially. Isotope α so that it lies entirely in T 0 , and to be
disjoint from all the chosen embeddings in T 0 of elements in V (τT ) \ V (τ ). Consider
what happens in the surface T : since V (τT ) fills T 0 , there exists an element of V (τT )
which intersects α however α is isotoped within T 0 . This element is necessarily an
element of V (τ ), because we have already excluded the remaining elements of V (τT ).

51

Now note that each element of C(τ ) admits an embedding contained in T 0 , and is
essential in S: so it has actually an embedding in T 00 . This means that C(τ ) fills T 00
again, because it cannot fill any higher complexity surface properly containing T 00 .
It has been proved above that, for any Z 0 non-annular connected component of
T 0 , V (τT |Z 0 ) = V (τT ) ∩ C(Z 0 ). Let Z 00 be the corresponding connected component
0

00

of T 00 : then (T Z , τT |Z 0 ) and (S Z , τ |Z 00 ) are easily identified. Discarding, in both
sides of the given equality, any curve homotopic to a component of ∂P , we have
V (τ |Z 00 ) = V (τ ) ∩ C(Z 00 ) as required.

Remark 2.2.12. For Y ⊆ X nested subsurfaces of S, τ an almost track on S,
τ = (τj )N
j=1 a splitting sequence of almost tracks, the following facts, following partly
from the above lemma, hold. Recall that the parameters for P+ and M+ , chosen in
Remark 2.1.26, are suited to ‘work well’ with subsurface projections.
• If the collection of curves πX (V (τ )) fills X, or the collection V (τ ) does, then
πY (V (τ )) fills Y . Also, if V (τ ) or πX (V (τ )) is a vertex of P+ (X), then
πY (V (τ )) is a vertex of P+ (Y ). These two facts are seen more easily using
the version a) in Definition 1.2.10 and the definition of filling in terms of constraints on the intersection pattern between curves; the self-intersection number
of the considered families of curves is no cause for concern, thanks to the choices
made in Remark 2.1.26.
• For 1 ≤ j ≤ N , the sets C(τj ) make up a decreasing family (Remark 2.1.24):
so the lemma yields that, along the sequence τ , the subsurfaces of S filled by
V (τj ) are also a decreasing family with respect to inclusion. If X is a fixed
subsurface of S, the same is true of the subsurfaces of S X (or of X itself, via
Lemma 2.2.8) filled by V (τj |X).
• If, along a splitting sequence, for a fixed subsurface X ⊆ S, πX V (τj ) is a vertex
of M+ (X), then all πX V (τj 0 ), for j 0 < j, are. And similarly with P+ (S), using
the version c) in Definition 1.2.10.
• The same as above is true for V (τj |X) instead of πX V (τj ). In particular the
indices j such that V (τj |X) is a vertex of P+ (X) and of M+ (X) include all the
ones in the accessible interval IX (see §2.3 below).
• The surface filled by V (τ |X) is a subsurface of the one filled by πX V (τj ).
The second statement of Lemma 2.2.11 may be slightly generalized: let X ⊆ S be a
subsurface such that ∂X is essentially disjoint from S 0 . Then V (τ |X) = V (τ )∩C(X).
The proof is the same as the one developed above, except that X replaces all connected
components of S 0 which it contains.
52

Lemma 2.2.13. Let X ⊂ S be a subsurface, and let τ be an almost track on S.
1. For X not an annulus, let γ ∈ W (τ |X), δ ∈ πX W (τ ), and suppose that Y ⊆ X
is a non-annular subsurface such that πY (γ), πY (δ) 6= ∅: then
dC(X) (γ, δ) ≤ F (8N1 (S X )) and

dY (γ, δ) ≤ F 32N1 (S X ) + 4



where the function F is the one defined by Lemma 1.2.4 and N1 is defined in
Lemma 2.1.18.
2. If X is an annulus, then πX W (τ ) ⊆ V (τ |X).
3. There is a bound C1 = C1 (S) such that the following is true, for X not an annulus.
If V (τ |X) is a vertex of P+ (X) then also πX V (τ ) is; and
dP+ (X) (πX V (τ ), V (τ |X)) ≤ C1 . Similarly for M+ (X) instead of P+ (X).
In the statement of this lemma we are implicitly using the identification of C(X) with
C(S X ). Moreover, we are identifying P+ (S X ) = P+ (X) using the constants for X a
subsurface of S (see Remark 2.1.26).
Proof. In order to prove Claim 1, let X0 ⊂ S X be a compact connected 2-submanifold
with boundary such that N̄ (τ |X)∪X ⊂ int(X0 ) and the inclusions X ⊆ X0 ⊆ S X are
homotopy equivalences. Let p : S X → S be the covering map. Let γ ∈ W (τ |X), β ∈
W (τ ), and fix a carried realization of each of these two curves in the respective tie
neighbourhoods (which are subsets of S X and of S, respectively).
One way to get a representative of πX (β) in C(S X ) is as follows. We suppose that
β is not essentially disjoint from X, else Claim 1 is trivial: under this assumption, let
β X be the union of all connected components of p−1 (β) that intersect X essentially:
β X is either a single curve or a collection of essential arcs in S X .
Then we can realize πX (β) as a family of curves in X0 : it will consist of all curves

which arise as connected components of X0 ∩ ∂ N̄ (β 0 ) ∪ N̄ (∂X0 ) for β 0 a connected
component of β X , and are essential in S X . If the regular neighbourhoods specified
in this expression is narrow enough, we have ∂ N̄ (β X ) ⊆ N̄ (τ X ) and transverse to all
ties it encounters; and N̄ (∂X0 ) ∩ N̄ (τ |X) = ∅.
As a result, let δ ∈ πX (β): the above realization of πX (β) gives a representative of
δ which is transverse to all ties of N̄ (τ |X) it encounters; however, it is possible that
δ has nonempty intersection with ∂h N̄ (τ |X). Since β is wide in τ , a component of
β X intersects at most twice any tie of N̄ (τ X ), and then, δ intersects at most 4 times
any tie in N̄ (τ |X).
Recall that γ is wide carried in N̄ (τ |X): so we may suppose that, within each
branch rectangle im(Rb ) of N̄ (τ |X), there are no more than 8 intersection points
53

between γ and δ. No intersection point can be found outside N̄ (τ |X), so i(γ, δ) ≤
8N1 (S X ) ≤ 8N1 (S). Recalling Lemma 1.2.4, dC(S X ) (γ, δ) ≤ F (i(γ, δ)).
By Remark 1.2.5, for any Y nonannular subsurface of X, if ξ1 ∈ πY (V (τ )) =
πY (πX (V (τ ))) and ξ2 ∈ πY (V (τ |X)), then i(ξ1 , ξ2 ) ≤ 32N1 (S X ) + 4, so

dC(Y ) (πX V (τ ), V (τ |X)) ≤ F 32N1 (S X ) + 4 ≤ F (32N1 (S) + 4) =: f (S).
For Claim 2, in which X is an annulus instead: just note that, every time β is
wide carried by τ , πX (β) is wide carried by τ X .
For Claim 3: apply the identification of τ |X with an almost track in X as specified
by Lemma 2.2.8, for ease of notation. If V (τ |X) is a vertex of P+ (X) then V (τ |X)
fills a — possibly disconnected — subsurface X 0 of X such that X \ X 0 is a collection
of pairs of pants (Definition 1.2.10); but V (τ |X) ⊆ C(τ ), so there is a surface X ⊆
W ⊆ S such that C(τ ) fills a possibly disconnected subsurface W 0 of W with W \W 0 a
collection of pairs of pants. V (τ ) fills the same W 0 (Lemma 2.2.11), so it is a vertex of
P+ (W ); and then, πX V (τ ) is a vertex of P+ (X) (see Lemma 2.2.11 and the Remark
following it).
Let M > max{M6 (S), f (S)}. Then, by Theorem 1.2.9 and Lemma 1.2.12,
X
dP+ (X) (πX V (τ ), V (τ |X)) ≤ e0
[dY (πX V (τ ), V (τ |X))]M + e1
Y ⊆X
Y not an annulus

where e0 , e1 are both functions of M and S; but the summation is empty. This proves
the existence of the claimed constant C1 (S) holding for the case of P+ (X).
One deals with M+ (S) in an entirely similar way. One shows that V (τ |X) is a
vertex of M+ (X) similarly, and the distance estimate goes also along the same lines,
except that the annular subsurface contributions also have to be taken into account,
and this is done with the following observation.
For Y an annular subsurface of X, making use of Claim 2, πY (πX V (τ )) =
πY V (τ ) ⊆ V (τ |Y ); and πY V (τ |X) ⊆ V ((τ |X)|Y ). Therefore dY (πX V (τ ), V (τ |X)) ≤
dC(Y ) (V (τ |Y ), V ((τ |X)|Y )). However (τ |X)|Y is a subtrack of τ |Y , so we can simply
apply point 9 in Remark 2.2.9, which gives dC(Y ) (V (τ |Y ), V ((τ |X)|Y )) ≤ 5.
Theorem 1.2.9, applied with M > max{5, M6 (S), f (S)}, concludes.



Definition 2.2.14. Let σ, τ be train tracks on a surface S, and let X ⊆ S be a
subsurface. Then the following notation will be employed:
dC (σ, τ ) := dC(S) (V (σ), V (τ ))
dX (σ, τ ) := dX (V (σ), V (τ )) = dC(X) (πX V (σ), πX V (τ ))
54

provided that neither of the collections involved in the distance measurement is empty,
and
dM+ (σ, τ ) := dM+ (S) (V (σ), V (τ ))
dP+ (σ, τ ) := dP+ (S) (V (σ), V (τ ))
dM+ (X) (σ, τ ) := dM+ (X) (V (σ|X), V (τ |X))
dP+ (X) (σ, τ ) := dP+ (X) (V (σ|X), V (τ |X))
provided that the sets considered on the right hand side are actual vertices of the
considered graphs.
A closing remark for this subsection: in general, a train train track split reflects
into an operation on induced train tracks which is either taking a subtrack, or performing splits (maybe more than one). This behaviour is controlled slightly better
with a theorem from [MMS12] which will be stated in a few pages.

2.2.2

Multiple moves specified by an arc

We now describe an operation on an almost track called an unzip. Informally, an
unzip for an almost track τ consists of cutting it open along a path that begins at a
point of ∂v N̄ (τ ) and, proceeding transversally to the ties, ends at an interior point
of N (τ ). An example of unzip can be seen in Figure 2.6, e.g. from the first to the
second picture. The effect on an unzip can always be expressed in terms of elementary
moves, but a number of arguments in this work will be explained more conveniently
by usage of this alternative formalism.
Definition 2.2.15. Let τ be an almost track on a surface S. A zipper in τ is a
smooth embedding κ : [−ε, t] → N̄ (τ ), for t > 0 and ε > 0 small, such that the
following are true.
• κ(−ε) lies along a connected component of ∂v N̄ (τ ) — call this component Z.
• κ is transverse to all ties of N̄ (τ ) it encounters.
• κ−1 (ties through switches of τ ) = Z ∩ [−ε, t].
• Let κP := cτ ◦ κ|[0,t] ; it is a smooth path along τ , not necessarily embedded. If
κ(t) lies on the same tie as a switch of τ , then the branch end κP ((t − ε, t]) is
small.
In order to describe the effect of an unzip note that, if κP is an embedding itself,
then there is an open set N (κ), with im(κP ) ⊆ N̄ (κ) ⊆ N̄ (τ ) and with the following
properties:
55

• N̄ (κ) is diffeomorphic to a triangle;
• one edge of the triangle is contained in Z, and the opposite vertex is κP (t);
• the remaining two edges are transverse to all ties they encounter;
• on the other hand, the interiors s1 , s2 of each of these two edges intersects τ
tangentially in a number of closed segments: i.e. in a neighbourhood of each
intersection segment between τ and si , τ ∪ si looks like a neighbourhood of a
large branch in a pretrack.
These properties imply the following. Let B be the connected component of
∂ N̄ (κ) \ τ which intersects Z, and let C := ∂ N̄ (κ) \ B — in other words, C is the
maximum connected subset of ∂ N̄ (κ) which contains κP (t) and has its extremes along
τ . Then, the tangential intersection property implies that τ ∪ C is a pretrack whose
complementary bigon regions are all adjacent to the image of κP .
So, again if κP is an embedding, we define the unzip along κ as τ 00 = (τ ∪C)\N (κ).
It is an almost track and has a tie neighbourhood N̄ (τ 00 ) ⊆ N̄ (τ ) with ∂ N̄ (τ ) \ Z ⊆
∂ N̄ (τ 00 ). Note, however, that there is no direct correlation between N (κ) and N (τ 00 ).
If κP is not an embedding, the unzip is defined inductively on dte. Let t0 = ζ − 2ε,
for ζ ∈ Z+ chosen such that κP |[−ε,t0 ] is an embedding instead. One can suppose, up
to tie-transverse isotopies, that κ|[−ε,t0 ] = κP |[−ε,t0 ] . Let τ 0 be the unzip of τ along
κ|[−ε,t0 ] , and let κ0 = κ ∩ N̄ (τ 0 ), reparametrized so as to be a zipper for τ 0 : the unzip
τ 00 of τ along κ is then defined as the unzip of τ 0 along κ0 .
Definition 2.2.16. A large multibranch for an almost track τ in a surface S is a
carried realization β of a carried arc (i.e. β is not to be considered up to isotopy) in
N̄ (τ ), whose endpoints belong to distinct components of ∂v N̄ (τ ).
A splitting arc is an embedded large multibranch traversing exactly one large
branch — equivalently it does not traverse any small branch. It may traverse any
number of mixed branches.
Let β be a large multibranch. Specify a splitting parity (left, right, or center); if
the parity is not center, also specify two distinct points P1 , P2 lying along βtrim (see
Definition 2.1.8), but not contained in the same ties as a switch of τ ; they will be
called anchors.
The multiple split with respect to the specified data is given by the following
construction.
• In case the specified parity is not center (see Figure 2.6): let κj : [−ε, tj ] →
N̄ (τ ), j = 1, 2, be two zippers, beginning at the opposite endpoints of β, following β and ending at P1 , P2 respectively; the pairing of the endpoints of β with
the anchors is to be done so that each the images of (κ1 )P and (κ2 )P overlap.
56

Unzip τ along κ1 to get a new almost track that we call τ1 . Note that P1 is a
switch of τ1 . We may suppose that the tie α2 of N̄ (τ ) through P2 is not entirely
contained in N̄ (τ1 ).
Then it is possible to find two zippers κ21 , κ22 in N̄ (τ1 ) with the following
property. On the one hand, κ21 , κ22 are both isotopic to κ2 via an isotopy which
keeps each point along the same tie of N̄ (τ ) (equivalently, cτ ◦ κ21 |[0,t2 ] , cτ ◦
κ22 |[0,t2 ] are both reparametrizations of (κ2 )P ); on the other hand, the two are
not isotopic to each other via a similar tie-transverse isotopy in N̄ (τ1 ).
Finally, if the parity specified for the multiple split is right, let κ02 be the one
between κ21 , κ22 that, after intersecting the tie through P1 , traverses the small
branch end to the right of P1 . If the parity is left instead, let κ02 be the other
of those two zippers. The multiple split of τ with the aforementioned data is,
then, defined to be the unzip of τ1 along κ02 .
• In case the specified parity is center: β traverses at least one large branch:
choose one, b. Let P1 , P2 be distinct points (also called anchors, even if in this
case they are part of the specified data) belonging to the same component of
β ∩ Rb ([−1, 1] × [−1, 1]). Let κ1 , κ2 be two zippers, with each of them following
β from an endpoint to P1 and P2 , respectively; this time, however, we choose
the two zippers to be disjoint. Unzip τ along κ1 and along κ2 to get a new track
which we call τ 0 . Here, β ∩ N̄ (τ 0 ) traverses a single branch, which is large. The
central multiple split of τ along β is, then, the central split of τ 0 along this large
branch.
If β is a splitting arc such that b is the only large branch β traverses, the wide split
along β with a given parity is defined to be the multiple split along β, according to
the given parity, choosing any two anchors P1 , P2 which lie along ties in Rb ([−1, 1] ×
[−1, 1]).
Remark 2.2.17. We have defined a large multibranch to be a fixed carried realization, rather than an isotopy class, of a carried arc. This has been convenient for the
definitions of anchors, and for the description of what a multiple split is supposed to
do. However, if one perturbs a large multibranch under an isotopy keeping each point
along the same tie, and the anchors in particular, the result of the multiple split is
the same.
Remark 2.2.18. The given definition of wide split includes, as a special case, the
one of a ‘standard’ split as defined by Figure 2.4. If b is the branch to split, one may
choose a suitable splitting arc which is entirely contained in Rb .
57

β
P2

P22

P21

b
β

κ02

P1

P21

P1

P22

P1
Figure 2.6: An example of a left multiple split. Here the large multibranch β is the one
with endpoints specified in the first picture and traversing twice the branch
b (this information suffices to figure out what it looks like in N̄ (τ ), up to
isotopies which are inconsequential for the construction). The anchors are
P1 , P2 ; P2 in the picture is meant to lie along the upper segment in β ∩ Rb .
In the second picture, the zipper κ1 following β from a suitable endpoint to
P1 has been unzipped, resulting in the definition of two points P21 , P22 in
place of the old P2 . The points P21 , P22 are endpoints for two substantially
different zippers κ21 , κ22 which both begin at the remaining endpoint of β and
project to the old zipper κ2 for τ . In the third picture, the zipper κ02 = κ22
has been unzipped, too. The choice of κ22 rather than κ21 is determined by
the specified parity.

58

The result of a wide split is always the same as a splitting sequence involving
exactly one split.
If τ is a generic almost track, then any elementary move on τ which is not a
central split is also the result of an unzip along a single zipper κ : [−ε, 1 + ε] → N̄ (τ ):
a large zipper defined on this domain will produce a parity split, and a small one will
produce a slide (see below for the definitions).
Remark 2.2.19. If τ 0 is the unzip of an almost track τ along a zipper κ : [−ε, t] →
N̄ (τ ), then τ 0 is itself an almost track, clearly carried by τ and therefore obtained
from it via a splitting sequence (Proposition 2.1.23). Some remarks will ease the
incoming estimates for the number of splits necessary to get τ 0 from τ . If t ∈ (0, 1)
then τ 0 is isotopic to τ ; whereas, if t ∈ [1, 2), then:
• if κP ((1 − ε, 1]) is a small branch end, then τ 0 is comb equivalent to τ ;
• if κP ((1 − ε, 1]) is a large branch end, and all small branch ends of τ incident
to κP (1) lie on the same side of κP , then τ 0 is obtained from τ with a parity
split, plus possibly some comb/uncomb moves;
• if κP ((1 − ε, 1]) is a large branch end, and small branch ends of τ incident to
κP (1) lie on both sides of κP , then τ 0 is obtained from τ with two parity splits,
plus possibly some comb/uncomb moves.
More generally, suppose that κ : [−ε, t] → N̄ (τ ) is a zipper with no restriction
on its length, but with the property that κP ((ζ − ε, ζ]) is a small branch end for all
integers 1 ≤ ζ ≤ t (we call it a small zipper ). Then the result of the unzipping is
comb equivalent to τ .
If one supposes instead that κP ((ζ − ε, ζ]) is a large branch end for all integers
1 ≤ ζ ≤ t (we call it a large zipper ), then necessarily κP is an embedding. A branch
can be traversed twice only if, for some value of ζ, κP ((ζ − ε, ζ]) is a small branch
end.
Similarly as before, there is a difference in behaviour depending on whether the
branches incident to κP ([1, t]) all lie on the same side of it or not. In the first case, the
unzip along κ is comb equivalent to an almost track obtained from τ with one parity
wide split; in the second case, the number of wide splits needed is 2. A particular case
of the first behaviour is when there is only 1 branch sharing a switch with τ ([1, t]).
Given a zipper κ : [−ε, t] → N̄ (τ ) which is neither large nor small itself, it is
always possible to take the maximal ζ ∈ N such that κ|[−ε,ζ+ε] is either a large or
a small zipper. Let τ 0 be the unzip of τ along κ|[−ε,ζ+ε] ; κ|[ζ+ε,t] admits a natural
reparametrization as κ0 : [−ε, t0 ], for some t0 ≤ t − ζ which makes it into a zipper for
τ 0 : unzipping τ 0 along κ0 is the same as unzipping τ along κ.
59

Recursively, one can decompose the unzip along κ into a sequence of unzips along
zippers that are alternatively small and large. An upper bound for the number of
large zippers involved is given by the number of ζ ∈ N such that κP ([ζ, ζ + 1]) is a
large branch of τ . We call this decomposition canonical.
Our notion of wide split agrees with the one defined in [Mos03], §3.13. We are
interested in Proposition 3.13.3 in that work: it uses the fact that, given two comb
equivalent train tracks, there is a canonical identification between the respective families of splitting arcs. This correspondence may be found with our definitions as well,
so the said Proposition holds for us:
Proposition 2.2.20. Let τ, σ be two comb equivalent train tracks, and α, β be splitting arcs, for τ and for σ respectively, which correspond to each other under the
equivalence of the two tracks. Let τ 0 be the train track obtained from τ by splitting
along α according to a given parity; and let σ 0 be the train track obtained from σ by
splitting along β according to the same parity.
Then τ 0 , σ 0 are comb equivalent.
Also, a recursive application of Proposition 3.13.4 in that monograph gives the
following:
Proposition 2.2.21. Given a train track splitting sequence τ , let (jr )R
r=1 be the indices such that the move from τjr −1 to τjr is a split. Then there is a sequence
σ = (σr )R
r=0 where σ0 = τ0 , σr is comb equivalent to τjr and σr is obtained from
σr−1 via a wide split, of the same parity as the split between τjr −1 and τjr .
A sequence of wide splits will be called a wide splitting sequence.

2.2.3

Cornerization of train tracks

The purpose of the following discussion is to connect the most common version of train
track found in the literature (which corresponds to the definition we have given) to the
notion of cornered train track, which is the notion of train track given and developed
in [MMS12].
Definition 2.2.22. Given a train track τ on a surface S, a train track τ 0 is a
cornerization of τ if:
• τ 0 is cornered;
• τ is obtained from τ 0 via a sequence of central splits and comb equivalences;
60

• if τ is transversely recurrent, then τ 0 also is.
We have not required explicitly that if τ is recurrent, then τ 0 also has to be: this is
indeed a direct consequence of the second bullet.
Lemma 2.2.23. Any train track τ on S admits a cornerization.
Proof. We focus on the case when τ is transversely recurrent. Let γ = {γ 1 , . . . , γ m }
be a set of essential curves in S as specified after Definition 2.1.20: pairwise disjoint,
dual to τ , such that for each branch b of τ there is a γ i intersecting b. It is not
required that two of them are not isotopic.
Suppose that τ is not cornered. We will build a transversely recurrent train track
τ such that ∂ N̄ (τ 0 ) has fewer smooth components than ∂ N̄ (τ ), and τ is obtained
0

from τ 0 with a central split. This will prove our claim by induction.
We deal with a special case first: τ contains a connected component λ which is
an embedded loop and all curves γ 1 , . . . , γ m intersect λ in at most one point. Then
necessarily one of them, γ 1 say, intersects λ in exactly one point. In that case, λ and
γ 1 together fill a handle H of S. In H, replace λ with a new component λ0 and γ 1
with a new dual curve γ 01 as shown in Figure 2.7.

γ1

γi

γi
λ0

λ

γ10

Figure 2.7: How to get rid of a loop component λ of τ with a dual curve γ 1 which intersects
τ in a single point, lying along λ. The two lie in a handle H of S. Note: λ0
shall differ from λ only in a neighbourhood of γ 1 whose intersection with any
other γ i is empty.

Define τ 0 := (τ \ λ) ∪ λ0 . It is true that ∂ N̄ (τ 0 ) has one smooth component less
than ∂ N̄ (τ ) and that τ 0 is a train track. Furthermore it is tranversely recurrent:
the new curve γ 01 may be isotoped to keep dual to τ 0 and intersect either of the two
branches in λ0 ; while the other curves γ 2 , . . . , γ m are still in efficient position with
respect to τ 0 , and therefore dual: as it was done in Definition 2.1.19, fix a regular
neighbourhood N (γi0 ) which contains no corners of ∂ N̄ (τ 0 ). As one may see from
the figure, H \ (N (τ 0 ) ∪ N (γi0 )) will only consist of connected components with ≥ 4
corners each, so S \ (N (τ 0 ) ∪ N (γi0 )) consists only of negative index components or
61

τ

τ0

τ
α

C

τ0

∂C

g

Figure 2.8: The elementary step to reduce the number of smooth components of ∂ N̄ (τ )
is depicted above. The dual curve γi shows the way to fold τ (this is how the
inverse of a split move is usually called) so as to reduce the total number of
smooth boundary components.

rectangles. For each branch b of τ 0 \ λ0 there is one curve among γ 2 , . . . , γ m which
intersects it.
Now suppose that a component as above does not exist in τ . Let α ⊂ ∂ N̄ (τ ) be
a smooth connected component: in particular α is isotopic to a wide carried curve of
τ , so it makes sense to talk about the carrying image τ.α. Let C be the connected
component of S̄ \ N (τ ) such that α ⊂ ∂C.
We wish to make sure that there is a curve γ i intersecting α, and intersecting τ in
at least two points. Suppose such a curve does not exist: i.e. all curves γi intersecting
α in fact intersect τ in only 1 point. By our hypothesis, this excludes the possibility
that τ.α is a smooth loop consisting of an entire connected component of τ .
Thus, in case τ.α is a smooth loop (i.e. α has an embedded train path realization),
we have that τ.α includes a mixed or large branch b of τ . In case τ.α is not a smooth
loop, τ.α surely includes a large branch b of τ .
In both cases, there is a γi such that the single point γi ∩ τ.α lies along b. With
a small isotopy on γi , slide it towards one of the large ends/the large end (resp.) of
b, and then past the relative switch. The curve thus obtained, γi0 , is still dual to τ ;
moreover the single intersection of γi with b has been replaced with an intersection
point of γi0 with each of the small branch ends which are incident at that switch.
So, it is always possible to assume, up to enlarging the collection γ of curves dual
to τ , that there exists a curve γi intersecting α, and having more than 1 intersection
point with τ . Fix a regular neighbourhood N (γi ) which contains no corners of ∂ N̄ (τ ).
Let p ∈ γi ∩ τ.α, let g be an arc of γ which begins at p, proceeds towards C through
a half-tie, then through C, and finally follows a tie of τ so as to arrive at the nearest
intersection point q ∈ γi ∩ τ . Pinch a neighbourhood of p in τ along g and fold it
with a neighbourhood of q, so as to create a new large branch f : this pretrack will
be our τ 0 (Figure 2.8).
62

We claim, first of all, that τ 0 is a train track. Note that the complementary regions
of N (τ 0 ) in S can be identified with the ones of N (τ ), except C which is replaced by
either a single complementary component C 0 or by two C 0 , C 00 . In either case what we
obtain is diffeomorphic to C \ (N (γi )|g ), where by N (γi )|g we mean the component
of N (γi ) ∩ C which contains g. Since, by efficient position of γi , components of
C \ N (γi ) either have negative index or are rectangles, C 0 , C 00 will have the same
property, because they are obtained as the gluing of some of such components, plus
some rectangles, along boundary edges. But g cannot cut a rectangle out of C: that
would mean that α is not a smooth boundary component. This proves the claim.
Also, we claim that τ 0 is transversely recurrent. The given curves γ1 , . . . , γk may
not be enough to intersect all branches of τ 0 because γi , in general, will intersect the
new large branch f born from folding, but not the four branches which are incident
to its ends. However, if γi is altered via an isotopy that slides it past either switch
of f , it turns into a curve, again dual to τ 0 , and intersecting two of the four branch
ends sharing their switch with f . So we may add two more curves, isotopic to γ i , to
the collection γ, to intersect all branches of τ 0 .
In case τ is not transversely recurrent, we apply a similar idea. We do not select
a family of curves γ; after choosing a connected component C of S̄ \ N (τ ) with a
smooth boundary component α, we may pick a properly embedded arc g in C such
that: the endpoints of g are distinct; at least of them lies along α; and g does not cut
out a region of C with nonnegative index. One builds τ 0 similarly as above and then
shows that is a train track.



We now describe how to cornerize consistently an entire splitting sequence: the
first step is to make it cleaner by turning it into a wide splitting sequence.
Remark 2.2.24. Any (wide) splitting sequence involves at most N1 central (wide)
splits: given a train track τ , each branch contributes at most 4 corners in ∂ N̄ (τ );
and each central split decreases the total number of corners by 4, whereas any other
move keeps it unvaried.
Lemma 2.2.25 (Postponing central splits). Given a wide splitting sequence σ =
(σ0 . . . , σi , σi+1 , σi+2 , . . . , σN ), call βj (for j = 0, 1) the splitting arc for σi+j that shall
be split along to get σi+j+1 . Suppose that the split along β0 is central whereas the one
0
along β1 is parity. Then there is a wide splitting sequence σ 0 = (. . . , σi0 , . . . , σi+k
, . . .),

with 2 ≤ k ≤ 7, such that
• σj = σj0 for all j ≤ i;
63

0
• the wide split(s) between σi0 and σi+k−1
is/are parity;
0
0
is central;
and σi+k
• the wide split between σi+k−1
0
for all j ≥ i + 2. (and in particular the all wide
• σj is comb equivalent to σj−2+k
0
splits in the subsequence (σj )j≥i+k have the same parity as the corresponding

ones in (σj )j≥i+2 ).
Proof. We first build a splitting sequence ρ turning σi into σi+2 , and involving 1 to 6
parity splits, followed by 1 central split.
Since the split along β0 is central, a tie neighbourhood N̄ (σi+1 ) is contained in
N̄ (σi ) \ β0 , with ties obtained by restriction of the old ones; and ∂v N̄ (σi+1 ) consists of
∂v N̄ (σi ), deprived of two connected components. So we may suppose that, in N̄ (σi ),
the arcs β0 , β1 are properly embedded and disjoint. The endpoints of β0 lie on distinct
components of ∂v N̄ (σi ), and so do the ones of β1 because this property must hold
when considering it as an arc in N̄ (σi+1 ). It is also impossible that the two splitting
arcs have an extreme each on the same connected component of ∂v N̄ (σi ), because the
two connected components where ∂β0 lie are not part of ∂v N̄ (σi+1 ).
The arc β1 , in general, is not a splitting arc for σi , but it is a large multibranch.
Also, since the wide central split along β0 shall turn it into a splitting arc, the two
arcs are embedded in N̄ (σi ) with this property: β1 traverses each branch at most
twice, and if b is any branch traversed twice then Rb \ β0 consists of two connected
components, and the two segments of β1 ∩ Rb each lie in one.
S
Let δ := b traversed by β0 β1 ∩ Rb . If B0 is the large branch of σi traversed by β0 ,
then each component of δ traverses B0 (here we use the term ‘traverse’ in an obvious
generalized setting). Let indeed e be the first or last branch end traversed by a
connected component δ0 of δ: either e is the first/last branch end traversed by β0 or
β1 ; or β1 and β0 give two different train paths originating from e. So the branch ends
at both extremities of δ0 are large, implying that δ0 must traverse a large branch:
necessarily B0 . In particular, δ shall consist of 0, 1 or 2 connected components.
Let B1 be the large branch traversed by β1 in σi+1 : cσi (B1 ) ⊆ σi is a union of
branches, including a large one b1 . Place the two anchors P1 , P2 for the wide split
of σi+1 along β1 within the same segment of β1 ∩ Rb1 ([−1, 1] × [−1, 1]). This is not
important for the wide split, as it only affects its result up to isotopy; but is relevant
for the following argument.
Let ρ00i be the result of the multiple split of σi along β1 , with the same parity as
the wide split that σi+1 undergoes in the sequence σ, and with anchors P1 , P2 . Call
κ11 the first zipper that gets unzipped, and ρ0i the result of the unzip; and call κ012 the

64

second zipper, with P20 ∈ ρ0i the endpoint of κ012 . The arc β0 is a large multibranch in
ρ00i , and the central multiple split along it gives back σi+2 . This multiple split will be
described as the unzip of a zipper κ01 to obtain an almost track ρ000
i , followed by the
0000
unzip along another zipper κ02 to get ρi , and finally a central split.
According to Remarks 2.2.18 and 2.2.19, the multiple split along β1 can be canonically decomposed into unzips along small and large zippers. While unzips along small
zippers give the same result as a series of comb/uncomb moves, the ones along large
zippers give a track which is comb equivalent to the one obtained with one or two
wide splits so their effect is obtained with a splitting sequence which involves one or
two splits, even if only up to isotopy. This specifies how to build a splitting sequence
ρ1 , turning σi progressively into ρ0i and ρ00i . Similarly, the subsequent multiple split
0000
along β0 is the result of a splitting sequence ρ0 turning ρ00i into ρ000
i , ρi , and finally
σi+2 . Also, let ρ = ρ1 ∗ ρ0 . The last split in this sequence is central, the others are
parity.
We will now estimate how many splits are involved, in total, in the sequence ρ1 , by
analysing how many unzips along large zippers take place when canonically decomposing the unzips along κ11 and κ012 . There are several cases to consider, but the following
consideration is always true: let η be the second-to-last almost track obtained when
applying the unzips in the canonical decomposition, and let κl : [−ε, t] → N̄ (η) be
the last zipper in the decomposition, which is a large one. Then t ∈ (1, 2), P1 belongs
to the tie through κl (1), and the branch end (κl )P ([1, t]) shares its switch only with
another branch end: so the unzip along κl contributes only one (parity) split in the
sequence ρ1 .
Suppose that P1 , P2 lie along δ, and therefore along one same connected component
δ0 ; in particular they lie along δ0 ∩ RB0 . The first case to consider is the one when
this supposition holds, and δ has only 1 connected component. In this case there are
no large branches contained in the image of (κ11 )P , and the one of (κ012 )P contains
only one. So the zipper κ11 is small, and either the zipper κ012 is large, or the unzip
along it can be subdivided into the unzip along a small zipper followed by one along
a large zipper. In either case, with this configuration ρ1 only involves 1 split (due to
the consideration in the above paragraph).
The second case is the one of P1 , P2 lying again along δ, but δ having two connected
components. Then the component different from δ0 is included entirely in β1 \ b1
— thus it traverses branches of σi that are completely contained in the image of
either (κ11 )P , or cσi ◦ (κ012 )P . In the first sub-case the unzip along κ11 is canonically
decomposed into at most 3 unzips, with one occurring along a large branch and the
65

other, or others, along one or two small ones; and the unzip along κ012 , instead, is
decomposed similarly as above; the large zippers involved are one or two, implying
that the splits required in ρ0 are 1 to 3 (4 is to be excluded because of the previous
consideration; in any case, they are all parity splits). In the second sub-case the
zipper κ11 is small, while the canonical decomposition of the unzip along κ012 involves
2 unzips along large zippers, the second of which requires only 1 split: there are again
at most 3 (parity) splits in ρ1 .
The third and last case is the one of P1 , P2 not lying along δ. In this case δ (if
nonempty) is entirely contained in the images of (κ11 )P and cσi ◦ (κ012 )P . Several cases
are possible as δ may consist of up to 2 components, and each of them may be traverse
branches belonging to each of the images of the specified maps. But a similar analysis
as above shows that the canonical decompositions of the two unzips together involve
at most three unzips along large zippers, thus there are at most 5 (parity) splits in
ρ1 .
Turning to ρ0 : β0 traverses each branch of ρ00i at most once. The restriction of the
tie collapse cσi : ρ00i → σi maps all branch ends of ρ00i sharing a switch with ρ00i .β0 to
branch ends of σi sharing a switch with σi .β0 , except possibly for the one, e, whose
endpoint v lies along the same tie of N̄ (σi ) as P1 or P2 : it may be the case that
cσi (e) ⊆ σi .β0 .
The multiple central split along β0 is a wide central split, if β0 traverses only
one large branch of ρ00i . If this is not true, the only possibility is that β0 traverses 2
large branches of ρ00i , with one of them delimited by v; call the other one b. Without
affecting the result of the multiple central split, one can suppose that the anchors
Q1 , Q2 (with Qj endpoint of κ0j ) lie in β0 ∩ Rb , and that Q1 is the one closer to v.
We can now apply a similar argument as before. The unzip along κ01 can be
canonically decomposed into at most 3 unzips, only one of which takes place along a
large zipper κl , defined on an appropriate interval [−ε, t]. One sees that, necessarily,
t ∈ (1, 2); (κl )P ([1, t]) contains no switches other than v and is only incident to the
branch end e. The zipper κ02 is small instead. So the splitting sequence ρ1 requires
at most 1 parity split further than the last, central split.
Let k be the total number of splits in ρ: it has been proved above that 2 ≤ k ≤ 7,
and that only the last split is central anyway.
Now that ρ has been defined, we build σ 0 from σ with the following steps. Call
σ− = σ(0, i). The wide splitting sequence σ(i + 2, N ) can be turned into a (regular)
00
splitting sequence, σ+
. According to Proposition 2.2.21 there is a wide splitting
0
sequence σ0+
, starting with σi , whose elements are orderedly comb equivalent to the

66

00
ones of ρ ∗ σ+
. This sequence begins with with k − 1 wide parity splits followed by
0
0
).
)k is comb equivalent to σi+2 . Define σ 0 = σ− ∗ (σ0+
a central one, and (σ0+



Definition 2.2.26. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a train track splitting sequence. We build a
splitting sequence P τ (not uniquely defined) in the following way.
Let τ̂0 be a cornerization of τ0 . Let τ̂ be a splitting sequence from τ̂0 to τ0 , and
then continuing as τ .
If τ̂ involves no central split, or all central splits are followed only by central splits
and slides, the process ends here. Else replace τ̂ with a wide splitting sequence σ 0
according to Proposition 2.2.21, and define a list of wide splitting sequences σ i = (σji )j
recursively this way: within the sequence σ i , let `(i) be the highest index j such that
i
i
σji , σj+1
, σj+2
are a central wide split followed by a parity one: postpone the central

split according to Lemma 2.2.25 above, and call σ i+1 the new sequence. Repeat the
process as far as it is possible to define `(i). Finally, replace the last constructed σ R
back with a (non-wide) splitting sequence: this will be P τ .
Let Cτ be the initial subsequence of P τ obtained by truncating just after the last
parity split. It is called a cornerization of τ .
We summarize the properties of Cτ in the below:
Lemma 2.2.27. Given a splitting sequence τ = (τj )N
j=0 on a surface S, let Cτ =
+M 0
M
. Then the following
(Cτj )j=0 be a cornerization of it defined from P τ = (P τj )M
j=0
properties hold:
1. if all elements of τ are recurrent, then so are the ones of Cτ ;
2. if all elements of τ are transversely recurrent, then so are the ones of Cτ ;
3. all elements of Cτ are cornered;
4. there is an increasing function f : [0, N ] ∩ Z → [0, M + M 0 ] ∩ Z, with f (0) = 0,
such that Cτf (j) is comb equivalent to a cornerization of τj for all 0 ≤ j ≤ N ,
and if N0 is the lowest index such that no parity split occurs in τ after τN0 then
f (N0 ) = M ;
5. |τ | − N1 ≤ |Cτ | ≤ 6N1 |τ |, for N1 defined as in Remark 2.2.24.
Proof.

1. P τM +M 0 is comb equivalent to τN . If the latter is recurrent, then so is

the former; but if the last element of a splitting sequence is recurrent then so
are all the previous ones.
2. Cτ0 is defined to be a cornerization of τ0 . If the latter is transversely recurrent, then so is the former; but if the first element of a splitting sequence is
transversely recurrent then so are all the following ones.
67

3. Cτ0 is cornered and, as all wide splits in the sequence are parity splits, the
complementary regions of each Cτj are diffeomorphic to the ones of Cτ0 .
4. Recall the notation for the construction of P τ set up in Definition 2.2.26. SupN 0 +N
0
i
pose that τ̂ = (τ̂j )j=0
and, for each i, σ i = (σji )m
j=0 . Let h : [0, N ] → [0, N +N ]
(here and onwards it is understood that intervals are always in Z) be defined
as h(j) = N 0 + j. Let ω : [0, N 0 + N ] → [0, m1 ] be defined inductively as
follows: ω(0) = 0; ω(j + 1) = ω(j) + 1 if τ̂j+1 is obtained from τ̂j with
a split, else ω(j + 1) = ω(j) (i.e. ω establishes the natural correspondence
between the splits of τ̂ and the corresponding wide splits of σ 0 ). And let also
ρ : [0, mR ] → [0, M +M 0 ] be defined inductively with these conditions: ρ(0) = 0;
ρ(j + 1) is the least index s > ρ(j) such that P τs+1 is obtained from P τs with
a split (so ρ establishes the natural correspondence between σ R and P τ ).
For 0 ≤ i < R − 1, let fi : [0, mi ] → [0, mi+1 ] be defined as follows. Suppose
0
, . . .), with a notation
σ i = (. . . , σs , σs+1 , σs+2 , . . .) and σ i+1 = (. . . , σs0 , . . . , σs+k
i

derived from the one used in the statement of Lemma 2.2.25. Then we define
fi (j) = j for j ≤ s; fi (j) = j + ki − 2 for j ≥ s + 3; fi (s + 1) = s; fi (s + 2) =
s + ki − 1 (i.e. fi maps the indices before and after the parity wide split
involved in the postponement to the indices before and after the parity wide
split(s) introduced by the postponement, respectively). Note that, for all j,
with comb moves and a central wide split, or
σji is either obtained from σfi+1
i (j)
is comb equivalent to it; whereas ω and ρ establish a correspondence between
tracks which are comb equivalent. So f := ρ ◦ fR−1 ◦ · · · ◦ f0 ◦ ω is such that
f (0) = 0, and also f (m0 ) = M because M is the lowest index such that the
following moves in P τ are all combs or central splits, which is what one must
get, due to the descriptions of the maps given. The map f is increasing because
all the composed maps are. Also, τj is obtained from Cτf (j) with a sequence of
central splits and so, by properties 2. and 3., the latter is a cornerization of the
former.
5. Lemma 2.2.25 and Remark 2.2.24 together yield that P τ involves at least as
many splits as τ , and the number of central ones is unvaried: hence the first
inequality. For the second one, consider for each i the numbers p(i) counting
i
how many parity wide splits occur between σ`(i)+1
and the end of the sequence
σ i ; and c(i) counting the number of consecutive wide central splits at the end
of the sequence σ i . For each 0 ≤ i < R one of the following is true: either
p(i + 1) = p(i) − 1, and in this case c(i) = c(i + 1); or p(i) = 1, p(i + 1) ≥ 1, and
in this case c(i + 1) = c(i) + 1. Let i1 , . . . , is be the sequence of indices i such
68

that the second scenario occurs: necessarily s ≤ N1 . For notational convenience,
denote also i0 = 0 and is+1 = R. Between any ij , ij+1 the number p(i) is strictly
decreasing, and is undefined for i = R, yielding that |σ ij+1 | ≤ 6|σ ij | for all
0 ≤ j ≤ s, because each old parity split has been replaced with at most six
ones. Hence |σ R | ≤ 6N1 |σ 0 |.
Switching between wide and regular split sequences leaves the number of splits
unaltered.

2.2.4



Diagonal extensions

We will list some technical lemmas by Masur and Minsky, which require the following
definitions:
Definition 2.2.28. Let τ be a recurrent almost track that fills S. A diagonal extension
of τ is an almost track σ of which τ is a subtrack, with the properties that
• if a branch b of σ is not included in τ , then its interior lies entirely in a connected
component of S \ N̄0 (τ ) (and its endpoints, in particular, are switches of τ );
• each peripheral annulus component in S \ N (σ) is also a peripheral annulus
component in S \ N (τ ).
The set of all recurrent diagonal extensions of τ will be denoted E(τ ). We will,
furthermore, denote
[

F(τ ) :=

E(ρ)

ρ recurrent subtrack of τ
ρ fills S

(this differs from the notation employed in [MM99], [MM04] where the same set
S
is called N(τ )). Consequently it is possible to define CE(τ ) = ρ∈E(τ ) C(ρ) and
S
CF(τ ) = ρ recurrent subtrack of τ CE(ρ).
ρ fills S

For k ∈ N and τ a recurrent almost track, let
CEk (τ ) :=

[

{γ ∈ C(δ) | µγ (b) ≥ k for each b ∈ B(τ )};

δ∈E(τ )

where, for each δ ∈ E(τ ), µγ is understood to be the element corresponding to γ in
MQ (δ): so CEk (τ ) is the set of the curves γ in CE(τ ) with the property that, among
the diagonal extensions which carry it, there is one where γ traverses each branch in
the subtrack τ at least k times.
S
Let also CFk (τ ) := ρ recurrent subtrack of τ CEk (ρ).
ρ fills S

69

Lemma 2.2.29 ([MM99], Lemma 4.2). Let τ, τ 0 be recurrent train tracks on a
surface S, and let X ⊆ S be a subsurface. Suppose that τ 0 |X is carried by τ |X, and
that they both fill S X (or, equivalently, X). Then CF(τ 0 |X) ⊆ CF(τ |X) and, if τ 0 |X
is fully carried by τ |X, then CE(τ 0 |X) ⊆ CE(τ |X).
More specifically, if δ 0 ∈ F(τ 0 |X) is a diagonal extension of a subtrack σ 0 of τ 0 |X
which fills X, then δ 0 is fully carried by δF(τ |X) a diagonal extension of a subtrack
σ of τ |X which again fills X; and σ 0 is fully carried by σ.
The original lemma has no reference to subsurfaces and induced tracks, but its proof
works equally well to prove the above statement replacing occurrences of S, σ, τ there
with S X , τ 0 |X, τ |X respectively, even if induced train tracks, being almost tracks, may
have paths encircling some peripheral annuli.
Note that the notion of tie neighbourhood in [MM99] is slightly different from
ours, as it is similar to our notion of N̄0 (τ ). Some terminology is different, too: note
in particular that train tracks filling the surface they lie on are called large, while
the sets we denote CE, CF correspond to the ones called P E, P N there, respectively
(they are, more generically, sets of transverse measures, but it is not important). The
last sentence in the statement above is not mentioned in the original statement, but
is deducible from its proof.
Lemma 2.2.30 ([MM99], Lemma 4.5). Let τ be a recurrent train track on a surface S, and let X ⊆ S be a subsurface such that τ |X fills S X . If α ∈ CE(τ |X) and β ∈
C(X) is not carried by any diagonal extension of τ |X, then i(α, β) ≥ minb∈B(τ ) µα (b).
Similarly as for the previous lemma, the original statement is not meant for induced
train tracks. Again the proof goes through with the same modifications pointed
out above, but it is worth highlighting some further points. In particular, from the
beginning of the proof, we need that all biinfinite train paths along the complete lift
of τ |X in H2 are uniformly quasi-geodesic: this is the content of Proposition 2.2.4.
Another point that is worth marking concerns what sort of shapes H2 is cut into
by τg
|X. Since τ |X fills S X , each of its complementary components in S X either has
a polygon as its closure, or is peripheral (meaning that its closure in S X includes an
arc of ∂S X ). Since polygons lift diffeomorphically, a similar property is true for τg
|X
2
2
g
in H . Any peripheral component P of H \ τ |X must be part of H± , because the
endpoints of β̃ cannot lie in ∂ H̄2 ∩ P : that would mean that β is not a closed curve
in S X but a properly embedded, and non-compact arc. These remarks ensure that
the original proof works for our generalized statement.
70

Lemma 2.2.31 ([MM99], Lemma 4.4). Let τ be a recurrent train track on a surface S, and let X ⊆ S be a subsurface such that τ |X fills X. Then:
• if X ∼
= S0,4 then N1 (CE3 (τ |X)) ⊂ CE(τ |X);
• if X ∼
= S1,1 then N1 (CE2 (τ |X)) ⊂ CE(τ |X);
• if X is of any other topological type, then N1 (CE1 (τ |X)) ⊂ CE(τ |X).
Here, with Nk (·) we mean the set of points at distance ≤ k from the given subset of
C(X).
Proof. Let us focus with the first case. According to the above lemma, for each
essential closed curves α ∈ CE3 (τ |X) and β 6∈ CE(τ |X) we must have i(α, β) ≥ 3.
So dC (α, β) ≥ 2, and this proves the claim. The same argument proves the claim in
the other cases.



Recall that in [MM99], for two train tracks σ, τ on a same surface, the authors
define dC (τ, σ) := minβ∈V (τ ),α∈V (σ) dC (β, α).
Lemma 2.2.32 ([MM99], Lemma 4.7 (Nesting Lemma)). There is a constant
D = D(S) such that if σ and τ are two recurrent train tracks filling S, with σ carried
by τ and dC (V (τ ), V (σ)) > D, then:
• for S ∼
= S0,4 , CF(σ) ⊂ CF3 (τ );
• for S ∼
= S1,1 , CF(σ) ⊂ CF2 (τ );
• for all other topological types, CF(σ) ⊂ CF1 (τ ).
Proof. The third statement is the actual content of the lemma in [MM99]. For what
concerns the other two statements, a simplified proof is possible. Recall, first of all,
that C(S0,4 ) and C(S1,1 ) are isomorphic to the Farey graph (see for instance [FM11],
§4.1.1). In [Iba09], Figure 10, there is a classification of the diffeomorphism types of
train tracks on S0,4 which are complete i.e. are not subtracks of any other train track;
whereas the only one in S1,1 is given in Figure 4 there. This means that any other
train track on these surfaces is diffeomorphic to a subtrack of the given ones; but it
is easy to note that none of those fills the surface. So, for each track τ that fills S0,4
or S1,1 respectively, {τ } = E(τ ) = F(τ ).
For each of the given train tracks τ in S0,4 (resp. in the only track given in S1,1 ),
the two vertex cycles α1 , α2 intersect in 2 (resp. 1) points, so they are connected by
an edge in C(S0,4 ) (resp. C(S1,1 ). It is therefore possible to enforce an identification
of the curve complex with the Farey graph such that α1 , α2 correspond to 0/1 and
1/0, respectively.
71

Let β ∈ C(S) (where S = S0,4 or S1,1 accordingly) be a curve carried by σ, and for
j = 1, 2 let bj the weight that β assigns to a branch of τ which is traversed by αj but
not α3−j (it will be the same for any such branch). Then, as an element of the Farey
graph, β corresponds to ±b2 /b1 . If β 6∈ CF3 (τ ) then either b1 or b2 is ≤ 2. Suppose,
without loss of generality, that b2 ≤ 2. If b2 = 1 then dFarey (±b1 /b2 , 1/0) = 1. If b2 = 2
then bb1 /2c/1 lies at distance 1 from both ±b1 /b2 , 1/0. This proves the claim.



Lemma 2.2.33 ([MM04], Lemma 3.5). Let τ be a recurrent train track on a surface S, and let X ⊆ S be a subsurface such that τ |X fills X. Then, if α ∈ V (τ |X)
then α 6∈ CF1 (τ |X).
Again the original given proof works for induced train tracks, with the same replacement as the one pointed out for Lemma 2.2.29. But, again, it is worth noting some
points: first of all, V (τ |X) must consist of at least 2 elements else it cannot fill S X ;
but then, C(τ |X) does neither (by Lemma 2.2.11). This replaces the argument used
at the beginning of the original proof to show that the set of projective transverse
measures has dimension ≥ 2.
Secondly, the proof appeals to the injectivity of a map P (ω) → ML(S), basically
the inverse map of the one mentioned in Proposition 2.1.14. In order to suit better our
setting, it may be more straightforward to say, to obtain the contradiction constructed
in the original proof, that v ∈ C(X) not having a unique carrying image in ω is a
behaviour that transgresses Corollary 2.1.12.
The assertion about positive generalized Euler characteristics (i.e. index) of the
disc D00 is still a contradiction, even if an almost track gives a larger variety of possible
complementary regions than in the original setting: this is because the original disc
D cannot intersect any lift of a peripheral annulus component of S X \ (τ |X), anyway.

2.3

Good behaviour of splitting sequences

In the following sections we aim to prove the following statement.
Theorem 2.3.1. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a splitting sequence of semigeneric, birecurrent
train tracks with their vertex sets V (τj ) ∈ P+ (S) for all 0 ≤ j ≤ N . Then there is a
constant A > 1, depending only on S, such that
dP+ (S) (V (τ0 ), V (τN )) =A |U(R(Cτ ))|.

72

Here, R and U denote, respectively, a rearrangement and an untwisting of the splitting
sequence τ , which we define in §2.4.4 and in §2.5, respectively.
Our result about splitting sequences in a graph which is quasi-isometric to the
pants graph comes after several other ones on the same line. The first one is a
structure theorem for cornered train track splitting sequences. We state it in a slighty
altered way. Given X ⊆ S a subsurface, and τ = (τj )N
j=0 a train track splitting
sequence indexed by the interval [0, N ], let the accessible interval for X in [0, N ] be
defined as follows.
• Suppose X is not an annulus. Then define
mX := min {i ∈ [0, N ] | diamX (C∗ (τi |X)) ≥ 3}
and nX := max {i ∈ [0, N ] | diamX (C(τi |X)) ≥ 3} .
If mX , nX are both finite and mX ≤ nX , then let IX = [mX , nX ]. Else set
IX = ∅.
• Suppose X is an annulus, with γ its core curve. Then define IX to be the set
of indices i such that γ is carried and is a twist curve in τi . That the set IX is
an actual interval is proved in Lemma 2.4.11. This definition of IX for annuli is
different from the one of [MMS12] thus the meaning of our statement is slightly
different from the one in the in the original paper; but this new version is easily
derived through Lemma 2.4.6, as we will see. We will also use the notation Iγ
to mean IN (γ) where γ ∈ C(S) and N (γ) is a regular neighbourhood of a curve
in the isotopy class γ.
Theorem 2.3.2 ([MMS12], Theorem 5.3). Given a splitting sequence τ = (τj )N
j=0
of generic, cornered, birecurrent train tracks on a surface S, there is a constant
K0 = K0 (S) such that, for each subsurface X ⊆ S, the following properties hold.
1. Let [a, b] ⊆ [0, N ] be an interval of indices, disjoint from IX except for, possibly,
a single point. Then, if πX (τb ) 6= ∅, then dX (V (τa ), V (τb )) ≤ K0 . If X is an
annulus, also dX (τa |X, τb |X) ≤ K0 .
2. If X is an annulus, and i ∈ IX , then τi+1 |X is obtained from τi |X with slides
(if this is the case between τi+1 and τi ); or with at most 2 splits and/or taking
a subtrack (if there is a split between τi and τi+1 ).
3. If X is not an annulus and i ∈ IX , then ∂X, when put in efficient position with
respect to τi , is wide. Moreover V (τi |X) fills S X . Finally, if τi+1 |X 6= τi |X,
then τi+1 |X is obtained from τi |X with slides (if this is the case between τi+1
and τi ); or with a split or taking a subtrack (if there is a split between τi and
τi+1 ).
73

The differences between this statement and the original one may be summarized
into three points. The first one is the definition of accessible interval for an annulus,
and this is cared after in Lemma 2.4.6 and the following observation. The other ones,
instead, concern the first statement: the interval [a, b] here may share an endpoint
with IX , which was not allowed in the original version. But if that statement is true
then this one also is, possibly picking a larger value for K0 (S) — see also Remark
2.1.26 for the existence of a universal bound for the distance induced by a single split.
A larger value of K0 is necessary also for the last sentence in this statement to be
true; but it is possible to choose one, due to Lemmas 2.1.18 and 2.2.13.
Remark 2.3.3. When a multicurve γ is wide (not carried) with respect to a given
train track τ , in general, it is not necessarily true that all possible efficient positions for
γ comply with the conditions defining a wide curve in Definition 2.1.19: the definition
of wide curve only asks for an efficient position as such to exist.
When γ = ∂X as in the above theorem, anyway, any efficient position with
respect to τi , i ∈ IX , shows that ∂X is wide. This is a consequence of Lemma 5.2
in [MMS12], where the proof works by contradiction, supposing that there exists any
efficient position for ∂X which does not show that it is wide.
A number of theorems prove that, in different measures, train track splitting
sequences induce quasigeodesic in more than one of the graphs previously introduced.
Theorem 2.3.4 ([MM04], Theorem 1.3). Given a train track splitting sequence
τ = (τj )N
j=0 on a surface S, there is a constant Q = Q(S) such that the set (V (τj ))j
is a Q-unparametrized quasi-geodesic in C(S).
The proof of this theorem employs all the lemmas listed in §2.2.4 above. We spend
just a few words about a secondary issue: that is, such proof requires some slight
adaptations in order to hold for S0,4 and S1,1 , whose curve graph have specific definitions. In order to cope with those surfaces, we may employ the lemmas in §2.2.4: i.e.
read the theorem’s proof replacing the lemmas employed there with the corresponding
ones in §2.2.4. Also, we need to replace each occurrence of PN (·) with CF(·); and
each occurrence of int(PN (·) with CF3 (·) or CF2 (·) depending on whether we aim
to prove the statement for S0,4 or S1,1 , respectively.
The same theorem is true for subsurface projections (adding some technical hypotheses):

74

Theorem 2.3.5 ([MMS12], Theorem 5.5). Given a splitting sequence τ = (τj )N
j=0
of cornered, birecurrent train tracks on a surface S, there is a constant Q = Q(S) such
that, for each subsurface X ⊆ S such that πX (V (τN )) 6= ∅, the sequence (πX V (τj ))N
j=0
is a Q-unparametrized quasi-geodesic in C(X).
And a stronger statement is true for the marking graph: it is the starting point
for our Theorem 2.3.1.
Theorem 2.3.6 ([MMS12], Theorem 6.1). Given a splitting sequence τ = (τj )N
j=0
of cornered, birecurrent train tracks on a surface S, whose vertex sets each fill S, there
is a constant Q = Q(S) such that the set (V (τj ))j∈J is a Q-quasi-geodesic in M+ (S).
Here J ⊆ [0, N − 1] is the set of indices j such that τj splits to τj+1
Theorems 2.3.2 and 2.3.4 are employed in the proof of 2.3.5, and 2.3.6 depends on
all the previous three.

2.4
2.4.1

All about twist curves
Terminology and basics

When a train track splitting sequence spans long distances in annulus subsurface
projections we find that, morally, they are caused by application of high powers of
Dehn twist; they may be produced by elementary moves which are hidden and sparse
in the sequence, and the key to track them down are twist curves. We need some
work to make this sentence precise.
First of all, suppose that τ is an almost track and that γ is a wide carried curve
for τ . Let Aγ be a wide collar and let X be a regular neighbourhood of γ in S. Let
p̂ : S X → S be the covering map. We have seen in point 2 of Remark 2.2.9 that the
core curve of S X (which we identify with γ itself) is carried by τ X and is embedded
as a train path; Aγ has a homeomorphic lift to S X , which is an annulus having τ X .γ
as a boundary component.
Definition 2.4.1. Let e be a small branch end of τ X such that e ∩ τ X .γ is a switch
of τ X . If e ∩ Aγ 6= ∅, we say that e hits Aγ ; else, e avoids Aγ . This terminology does
not apply to branch ends of τ X such that e ∩ (τ X .γ) is empty, or consists of more
than one point.
Given a small branch end e0 of τ , we say that it hits Aγ if e0 = p̂(e) for e a branch
end of τ X hitting Aγ ; we say that e0 avoids Aγ if e0 does not hit Aγ and e0 = p̂(e) for
75

Figure 2.9: Left: An example of twist curve which is not embedded as a train path. A
possible choice for a twist collar Aγ is marked in grey, and the arrows describe
the Aγ -orientation. The extremities of splitting arcs for a wide spurious and
a wide bispurious split (see Definition 2.4.8) are drawn with a dashed and a
dotted line, respectively. Right: The effect of a wide bispurious split. The
twist curve has a twist collar that necessarily differs from the previous one.
In Remark 2.4.12 we show how to make the two collars correspond under a
suitable homotopy equivalence E based on the tie collapse.

e a branch end of τ X avoiding Aγ . With this definition we are including, among the
small branch ends of τ avoiding Aγ , the ones which are part of τ.γ, too. However,
this terminology does not apply to branch ends of τ which are disjoint from τ.γ.
The set of all branch ends hitting Aγ and the set of all branches avoiding it will
be called the two sides of γ.
Definition 2.4.2. Let τ be an almost track on a surface S, let γ ∈ C(S) be wide
carried by τ and let X be a regular neighbourhood of γ. The curve γ is a twist curve
for τ X and for τ if the two following conditions hold.
• There is a wide collar Aγ (to be viewed in S X ) such that, for each branch end
e of τ X hitting Aγ , the e-orientation (see Definition 2.2.10) on γ is always the
same. The collar Aγ (regarded as either ⊆ S or ⊆ S X ) will be called a twist
collar , and the orientation given to γ the Aγ -orientation.
• Among the branches of τ X included in τ X .γ, there is at least a large one.
A curve γ whose realization as a train path in τ is embedded, and which may be
regarded as a twist curve after picking a collar on either of its sides, is called combed.
An example of twist curve for an almost track τ is given in Figure 2.9. The second
bullet above is equivalent to saying that there is a branch end f in τ X which avoids
Aγ , and such that the f -orientation is opposite to the Aγ -orientation. In particular, if
γ is combed, the orientations given to γ by twist collars on opposite sides are opposite.
So, this condition implies that C(τ X ) 6= ∅ and that γ is carried by τ |X, by point 8
in Remark 2.2.9.

76

Definition 2.4.3. Let τ be an almost track on a surface S, let γ ∈ C(S) be a twist
curve for τ with a fixed regular neighbourhood X and a fixed twist collar Aγ . Let e be
a branch end of τ X sharing a switch with τ X .γ and avoiding Aγ . If the e-orientation
on γ is opposite to the Aγ -orientation we call e an Aγ -favourable branch end; else we
say that e is Aγ -adverse.
For τ , γ, X as specified above, we say that γ is a twist curve, or it is combed, in
τ |X if it is a carried curve there and satisfies similar hypotheses as the ones that have
been laid out for γ in τ X . Lemma 2.4.6 specifies how being a twist curve in τ relates
with being one in τ |X.
Note: all pretracks and splitting sequences in the present §2.4 will be generic,
as we will specify in our definitions and statements. Only in §2.4.5, for technical
reasons, we need to employ some semigeneric ones (see the note at the beginning of
that subsection).
Note first of all that, if τ is a generic almost track with a wide curve γ, which
has Aγ as a wide collar and X as a regular neighbourhood of the latter, then a small
branch end e0 that hits (resp. avoids) Aγ in τ has only one lift to S X which also hits
(resp. avoids) Aγ 3 . So some of the definitions given above for τ X descend to τ .
• If e0 is a small branch end of τ which hits (resp. avoids) Aγ , let e be the lift of
e0 to τ X which hits (resp. avoids) Aγ , and define the e0 -orientation on γ to be
the e-orientation.
• If γ is a twist curve with Aγ a twist collar, and e0 is a small branch end of
τ which avoids Aγ , let e be the lift of e0 which avoids Aγ . We say that e0 is
Aγ -favourable (resp. adverse) if e is Aγ -favourable (resp. adverse).
Remark 2.4.4. We set up here several pieces of notation referring to regular neighbourhoods of twist curves, to be used in the present section. Given γ a twist curve of
a generic almost track τ , let Aγ be a twist collar and X be a regular neighbourhood of
γ. For simplicity, we will suppose that Aγ is a connected component of N (τ.γ) \ τ.γ
which is suitable to serve as twist collar. Also, we will identify it with its diffeomorphic lift to S X , which serves as a twist collar for γ ⊂ S X , regarded as a twist
p

p̂

curve of τ X . Call H2 → S X → S the (metric) covering maps between these surfaces.
p

Extend p to the metric universal cover H̄2X → S X of S X (H̄2X is homeomorphic to a
closed strip). We set up a parametrization as specified by the following commutative
diagram:
3

This is not true in the semigeneric setting: a branch end of τ which avoids Aγ and shares its
switch with two small branch ends in τ.γ has two distinct lifts that give opposite orientations to γ.

77

R × [−2, 2] ....................υ̃.............................. H̄2X
...
...
...
...
...
...
....
...............
.

e

......
......
......
......
......
......
......
......
...... .
.................
.................................................

q

S1 × [−2, 2]

υ

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
.
...............
.

p

SX

Here, e(x, t) = (e2πix , t) and υ, υ̃ are built to be two diffeomorphisms, which are
not required to be orientation-preserving (see below for a determination of whether
they preserve orientations), and are not unique; however, we specify some requests
below. To start with, we require that τ X .γ = υ(S1 × {0}) and Aγ = υ (S1 × (0, 1)).
Define q := υ ◦ e; γ̃ := υ̃(R × {0}); and Ãγ := υ̃ (R × (0, 1)). Also, orient the two
components of ∂S X consistently with the Aγ -orientation on γ; their lifts are to be
oriented accordingly.
We require that the map q complies with the following request. Let b be a branch
of τ X hitting Aγ , and consider a connected component b̃ of q −1 (b) ∩ (R × [0, 1]): we
require that, for all t ∈ [0, 1], b̃ ∩ (R × {t}) is a unique point that we denote b̃(t), and
that, if b̃ : [0, 1] → R × [0, 1] is parametrized so that b̃(1) lies along R × {0}, then the
second coordinate of b̃ is decreasing.
This request means that, in R × [0, 1], the preimages of branches hitting Aγ are
directed from the upper left to the lower right. The Aγ -orientation on γ together
with the above request on q, then, determine whether υ is orientation-preserving or
-reversing. In the first case we say that the twist curve γ has positive sign, in the
second one that it has negative one. This property does not depend on the twist
collar Aγ chosen; even in case γ is combed, and we take two different twist collar
which intersect opposite sides of γ, the sign of γ with respect to either collar is the
same.
A natural map R × [0, 1] → Āγ , where the closure of Aγ is to be meant in S, is
obtained as p̂ ◦ q; but, with an abuse of notation, we will denote it again as q, taking
care of avoiding misunderstandings.
A number x ∈ R will be called an upper obstacle for τ X if (x, 0) ∈ q −1 (v) where v
is a switch of τ X along τ X .γ, and incident to a branch end hitting Aγ ; a lower obstacle
if (x, 0) ∈ q −1 (v) where v is a switch of τ X along τ X .γ, and incident to a branch end
avoiding Aγ and favourable; a fake obstacle if (x, 0) ∈ q −1 (v) where v is a switch of
τ X along τ X .γ, and incident to a branch end avoiding Aγ and adverse.
A ramp ρ in τ X will be said to be hitting or avoiding Aγ , to be Aγ -favourable or
adverse in accordance with the properties of the only branch end adjacent to τ X .γ
and traversed by ρ.
78

Remark 2.4.5. Let γ be a twist curve for a generic almost track τ , with a twist
collar Aγ ; and let α ∈ C (N (γ)).
The decomposition of a train path realization of α into ρ1 , β, ρ2 given in point 5
of Remark 2.2.9 gets a further property in this case: since one of between ρ1 , ρ2 (say
ρ1 ) terminates with a branch end hitting Aγ , the last branch end of ρ2 , which avoids
Aγ must be favourable: it has been already noted, indeed, that the two branch ends
must give opposite orientations to Aγ . If α is oriented so that ρ1 is its first segment,
then the segment β is swept according to the Aγ -orientation.
Lemma 2.4.6. Let τ be a generic, recurrent almost track on a surface S, γ ∈ C(S)
be a curve carried by τ , and X be a regular neighbourhood of γ. Then γ is a twist
curve for τ if and only if it is a curve carried by, and combed in, τ |X.
More specifically, if γ is a twist curve, then τ |X contains all branches of τ X hitting
Aγ in S X (which biject naturally with the ones of τ hitting Aγ in S) and branch ends
which avoid Aγ and are favourable. Moreover, for each pair e, e0 where e is a branch
end hitting Aγ and e0 is one which avoids Aγ and is favourable, there is an element
of V (τ X ) which traverses both.
The branches avoiding Aγ and adverse to it do not belong to τ |X.
Proof. Recall points 2 and 3 in Remark 2.2.9, in particular that γ is embedded as a
train path in τ X .
No matter whether γ is a twist curve for τ , if it is one for τ |X then it is actually
combed: for in Remark 2.4.5 it is shown that, if e is a branch end traversed by some
α ∈ C(X) and avoiding Aγ , then e is favourable.
Note moreover the following behaviour. Let e, e0 be two branch ends sharing a
switch, v, v 0 , respectively, with τ X .γ, located on opposite sides of τ X .γ, and such that
the e- and the e0 -orientations on γ are opposite. One can always find an incoming
ramp ρ traversing e and an outgoing one ρ0 traversing e0 . The switches v, v 0 will cut
τ X .γ into two segments, only one of which, β, has at its extremes two large branch
ends. The train route obtained from the concatenation of ρ, β, ρ0 is then a properly
embedded arc, hence it is a realization of some element of V (τ X ) which traverses both
e, e0 .
Suppose now that γ is a twist curve with a twist collar Aγ : then it is a twist curve
in τ X too and, since it is embedded there, the branches it traverses in τ X include a
large one only if a favourable branch end e0 exists. Pick a branch end e of τ X hitting
Aγ : the pair e, e0 , however the two are chosen, complies with the hypotheses above;

79

thus they are traversed by one same element of V (τ X ), and in particular they are
part of τ |X; so all branches hitting Aγ and all favourable ones belong to τ |X.
Let α ∈ V (τ |X) be any of the wide arcs constructed in the way specified above: it
certifies that C(τ X ) 6= ∅ and therefore, by point 8 in Remark 2.2.9, that τ X .γ ⊂ τ |X.
Moreover (τ |X).γ must necessarily include a large branch of τ |X, else it is impossible
for the arc α to enter (τ |X).γ and leave it after travelling through some of its branches.
Clearly, there is a side of γ such that all branch ends of τ |X sharing a switch
with (τ |X).γ and approaching it from that side will give γ the same orientation, so
γ is a twist curve in τ |X. Due to the argument at the beginning of this proof, it is
combed; equivalently, no branch ends avoiding Aγ and adverse belong to τ |X. One
implication of the first part the lemma’s statement is thus proved, together with the
part of the statement which specifies which branch ends around τ X .γ belong to τ |X.
We only have left to prove the remaining implication. Suppose that γ is combed
in τ |X — in particular it is carried, thus so it is by τ X and by τ . The presence of a
large branch of τ X within τ X .γ is proved with the same argument as in the paragraph
above; hence there must be a large branch of τ within τ.γ.
We claim now that γ is wide in τ . Let γ be a carried realization: if it is not wide
then — regardless of the orientation that we put on it — there are two branches
b1 , b2 of τ , traversed at least twice, such that in Rb1 one segment s1 of γ sees another
segment t1 to its left, and in Rb2 one segment s2 of γ sees another segment t2 to its
right. Let γ̂ be the homeomorphic lift of γ to S X . Call ŝ1 , ŝ2 the lifts of s1 , s2 which
are contained in γ̂, and t̂1 , t̂2 the lifts of t1 , t2 which are located in the same branch
rectangles as ŝ1 , ŝ2 . The segments t̂1 , t̂2 belong to other lifts γ̂ 1 , γ̂ 2 of γ; they do not
cross γ̂. So γ̂ 1 must traverse two branch ends e11 , e12 , each sharing a switch with τ X .γ,
located on the same side of γ, and impressing on it opposite orientations. Similarly
γ̂ 2 must traverse branch ends e21 , e22 with the same properties. Suppose that the
e11 , e21 -orientations on γ are opposite: then, by the observation at the beginning of
the present proof, there is an element αj ∈ V (τ X ) traversing both e1j , e2j for j = 1, 2.
Thus e11 , e12 both belong to τ |X contradicting the assumption that γ is combed there.
Now we prove that, among the wide collars of γ in τ X , there must be at least
one twist collar (meaning, one such that all branch ends intersecting it give the same
orientation to γ). Suppose not: then, on each side of γ in τ X , we can find a pair of
branch ends sharing a switch with τ X .γ and impressing opposite orientations on γ.
Call e11 , e12 the ones on one given side and e21 , e22 the others on the other one. The
same contradiction as above occurs.

80

Note that a twist collar Aγ for γ in τ X projects to a wide collar for γ in τ ; and it
will be a twist collar, too. This completes the proof.



The above lemma is the reason why we have been able to state Theorem 2.3.2
without problems due to having employed a definition of accessible interval for annular subsurfaces which is different from the one given in [MMS12]. As for the first
statement: by looking at the original statement, we see that our definition comprises
an interval larger than the original one, and this does not affect the statement’s
validity.
The second statement of Theorem 2.3.2 may instead seem stronger than what is
proved in the original paper. But it is not in reality, because the proof only uses the
property that the induced track under exam is combed.
Lemma 2.4.7. Let γ be a twist curve for a generic, recurrent almost track τ , and let
X be a regular neighbourhood of γ. Then τ |X \ (τ |X).γ (the closure is meant in S X
here) is a disjoint union of trees: each of them intersects (τ |X).γ in a single point
which serves as a root, and consists only of mixed branches of τ |X.
In particular, every train path between two endpoints of such a component is a
ramp. If such a ramp ρ is outgoing, then ρ enters each traversed branch from its
small end.
Proof. Step 1: given any two distinct outgoing ramps ρ1 , ρ2 in τ |X, their images either
are disjoint or their intersection is a bounded, initial sub-train path of both.
Suppose that the images of the two ramps are not disjoint. Then, by Lemma
2.4.6, either they both hit Aγ or both avoid it and are favourable. Suppose the first
alternative holds, the other being entirely similar. As a consequence of point 4 in
Remark 2.2.9, both ρ1 , ρ2 are embedded train paths. Even if ρ1 , ρ2 do not begin at
the same switch along τ X .γ, then (up to reversing indices) it is possible to have an
embedded train path ρ01 which begins at the same switch as ρ2 , follows part of (τ |X).γ
and then continues as ρ1 . The claim is proved if we show that the intersection between
the images of ρ01 and ρ2 is connected.
Suppose it is not. Then necessarily ρ1 , ρ2 together bound a topological disc B,
with 1 or 2 cusps along its boundary. Since τ |X ⊆ τ X , B is a union, along their
respective boundaries, of regions as in Remarks 2.1.10 and 2.2.1, so it must have
negative index: and this is a contradiction.
Step 2: the bounded branches of τ |X not belonging to (τ |X).γ are all mixed.

81

An immediate consequence of the previous step is that no branch in τ |X is traversed by distinct ramps in opposite directions.
If b ∈ B(τ |X) is a large branch, not contained in (τ |X).γ, then fix ρ an outgoing
ramp which traverses ρ, and let ρ0 be any other ramp which also does so. Then, since
b belongs to the intersection between the images of ρ and ρ0 , ρ and ρ0 are not only
traversing b in the same direction but they are also coming from the same branch end
adjacent to b. This means that one of the branch ends adjacent to b, is actually not
traversed by any outgoing ramp in τ |X: and this contradicts the definition itself of
τ |X.
If b ∈ B(τ |X) is a small branch, not contained in (τ |X).γ, then fix ρ an outgoing
ramp which traverses ρ, and let e be the branch end ρ traverses just after leaving b.
Let ρ0 be an outgoing ramp traversing e but not b. Then ρ, ρ0 traverse e in the same
direction, and their routes must coincide up to the point when they enter e. But this
would require ρ0 to traverse b, too: and this is our contradiction.
Step 3: τ |X \ (τ |X).γ is a graph with no cycles.
If C ⊆ τ |X \ (τ |X).γ is a cycle, it consists entirely of mixed branches in τ |X.
But then it is smooth i.e. it represents a curve carried by τ |X. This curve cannot be
nullhomotopic, so it is necessarily homotopic to γ. But then, C and (τ |X).γ project
to S and give two distinct carried realizations of γ, a contradiction.
Note that any outgoing ramp ρ in τ |X will enter its first branch from a small
end. Since the branch is mixed, ρ leaves it through its large end; necessarily, ρ shall
traverse all its branches in a similar fashion. This ends the proof.


2.4.2

Splitting sequences seen at a twist curve

Definition 2.4.8. Let τ be a generic almost track on S and let γ be a twist curve
for τ . A twist split about γ is a parity split of a large b ∈ B(τ ) included in τ.γ and
sharing one switch with a branch end hitting Aγ , where the parity is chosen so that
γ is still carried and stays a twist curve after the split.
A twist slide about γ is a slide as the one explicated by the second drawing in
Figure 2.3, provided that the horizontal line consists of branches in τ.γ; and either
the collar Aγ is under such line and the slide is represented by the rightward arrow;
or the collar Aγ is above such line and the slide is represented by the leftward arrow.
Note that the inverse move of a twist slide is not a twist slide.
A slide, split, or wide split on τ is far from γ if there is a regular neighbourhood
N (τ.γ) such that τ ∩ N (τ.γ) is not altered by the move.

82

A move that is neither a twist one nor a far one from γ, but keeps γ a twist curve,
is called a spurious move. A spurious (wide) split affecting a large branch traversed
twice by γ will be called bispurious.
A wide twist split about γ is a wide split corresponding to a sequence of elementary
moves where the only split is a twist split about γ. Similar definitions hold for a wide
far , wide spurious or wide bispurious split. Note that a wide split is far from γ if and
only if N (τ.γ) is not altered by the wide split as a whole.
We will say that a splitting sequence τ = (τj )kj=0 has twist nature about γ if it
consists only of twist splits and twist slides (not wide twist splits) about γ.
Note that the property of being a twist curve is never altered by a slide. A twist
move always involves a branch b along τ.γ with exactly one switch shared with a
branch end hitting Aγ . Informally, one may view a twist move as moving this latter
branch end forward along τ.γ, according to the Aγ -orientation, so that its endpoint
moves past the other switch of b. This idea is exploited with the introduction of
modelling functions for sequences of twist nature, which will be explained in Remark
2.4.14. However, note that the definition of twist nature is not easily adapted to
a wide split setting: when realizing a wide twist split as a sequence of elementary
moves, in particular, it may be necessary to employ slides which are not twist.
Remark 2.4.9. Let γ be a twist curve for a generic almost track τ . Suppose that
a splitting arc α or a zipper κ describe a move that leaves γ carried. Then how is
α, or κ, placed with respect to τ.γ? And with respect to a carried realization γ of
γ? The following considerations are true also for ‘standard’ (non-wide) splits, as a
special case.
If the wide split along α is far from γ, then α is disjoint from both τ.γ and γ. If
the wide split is twist, then, however one picks a lift α̂ of α to S X , its extremes lie in
distinct components of S X \ τ X .γ.
If the given wide split is spurious, then α and γ admit disjoint carried realizations
in N (τ ). The examples of spurious and bispurious splitting arcs given in Figure 2.9,
left, should be able to communicate intuitively why this is true. Note that, when γ
is an embedded in τ , γ can be taken to be a train path realization of γ. When it is
not, there is no guarantee that α can be realized disjointly from τ.γ: it cannot if and
only if the wide spurious split is actually bispurious.
As for the case of a zipper κ, similar consideration apply. Namely, if all elementary
moves specified by unzipping κ are far, then κ is disjoint from both τ.γ and γ. More
generally, κ can always be made disjoint from γ (not from τ.γ). Also, if Aγ is a twist
83

collar for γ in τ , the following alternative can be assumed: either the last point of
κ lies along τ.γ, or the image of κ does not intersect Aγ . In other words, the unzip
κ will never create a switch inside Aγ . This assumption does not pose any actual
limitation as to the possible result of an unzip: the only restriction following from it
concerns the realization of the result of the unzip within its isotopy class.
Note that a spurious split or wide split is possible only if γ is not combed; and
that the splitting arc corresponding to a spurious split must traverse one of the large
branches in τ.γ.
Remark 2.4.10. Suppose that γ is a twist curve in a generic almost track τ with a
twist collar Aγ .
Let τ undergo a (wide) split which turns it into τ 0 , but keeps γ a twist curve:
then, once a carried realization τ 0 ,→ N (τ ) is fixed, let c : τ 0 → τ be the restriction
to τ 0 of the tie collapse cτ : N̄ (τ ) → τ . Then c(τ 0 .γ) = τ.γ; moreover one may
find an extension c : S → S, isotopic to idS , and a twist collar A0γ for γ in τ 0 , such
that Aγ = c(A0γ ). A more concrete way of choosing twist collars, consistently with a
splitting sequence, will be described in Remark 2.4.12.
Meanwhile we give the following definition: let T be a subset of the family of
almost tracks fully carried by τ , with the property that γ is a twist curve for each
σ ∈ T (e.g. T may be the family of the entries of a splitting sequence preserving
γ). For each σ ∈ T , let Aγ (σ) be a twist collar for γ. We say that the twist collars
{Aγ (σ) | σ ∈ T } (more appropriately, the pairs {(σ, Aγ (σ)) | σ ∈ T }) form an Aγ family if, for each pair σ, σ 0 ∈ T such that σ carries σ 0 , the two twist collars Aγ , A0γ
are related in the way described above.
The Aγ (σ)-orientations for γ in the respective almost tracks are all the same, and
we may as well just call then the Aγ -orientation. Similarly we may speak of a branch
end of σ which hits or avoids Aγ , when we actually mean that it hits or avoids Aγ (σ).
Lemma 2.4.11. Given a generic splitting sequence of almost tracks τ and a curve γ,
let Σ be the set of indices j such that γ is a twist curve for τj : then Σ is an interval.
If all entries in the splitting sequence are recurrent, then γ can only cease to be a
twist curve by ceasing to be carried.
Given a fixed J ∈ Σ and Aγ a twist collar for τJ , there is an Aγ -family of twist
collars for τ (J, max Σ).
This means that, along a recurrent splitting sequence, an element of C(S) evolves
through a subsequence of these stages:
84

a. carried, not wide;
b. wide, not twist;
c. twist, not combed;
d. combed;
e. not carried.
Proof. Let j0 be the lowest of the indices j such that γ is a twist curve for τj , with a
twist collar Aγ (j0 ), and let j1 be the highest index such that γ is carried by τj1 . Then
γ is carried by all τ (j0 , j1 ) because the set of carried curves can only shrink along a
splitting sequence (Remark 2.1.24). Also, γ is wide in this sequence, as a family of
wide collars Aγ (j) for τj .γ (j ∈ [j0 , j1 ]) can be defined recursively, with the condition
that a suitable homotopy equivalence S → S mapping τj to τj−1 , as in Remark 2.4.10,
will also map Aγ (j) to Aγ (j − 1).
Suppose that γ is a twist curve in τj for a fixed index j0 ≤ j < j1 , with Aγ (j) a
twist collar; so γ is carried by τj+1 . If the elementary move on τj is a slide or there
is neighbourhood of τj .γ not affected by the move, then clearly γ is a twist curve in
τj+1 with Aγ (j + 1) a twist collar. So suppose that the elementary move operated on
τj is a split which affects the train track close to τj .γ. Then the branch being split is
traversed by γ; the split can be considered to be a wide split along a splitting arc α
that traverses one branch only.
Since γ is a twist curve, at least one of the ends of α must lie on the side of τj .γ
opposite to Aγ (j). If exactly one does, then the only parity that keeps γ carried after
the split is the one specifying a twist split. If both endpoints lie opposite Aγ (j), then
any splitting parity keeps γ carried, and the branch ends of τj+1 hitting Aγ (j + 1)
all give γ the same orientation, similarly as before. So the only way γ may fail being
a twist curve in this last case is the absence of any large branch of τj+1 among the
ones traversed by γ. But if this is the case, then no further split may affect all
neighbourhoods of τj 0 .γ for j 0 ≥ j: therefore γ will not return a twist curve at any
later stage in the splitting sequence τ — but it may still be carried.
This proves that Σ, as defined in the statement, is an interval; also, {Aγ (j)}j∈Σ
is an Aγ (0)-family. Moreover, if τ is recurrent, the last kind of split described above,
which keeps γ carried but does not keep it a twist curve, cannot occur. In that event,
indeed, τj+1 is not recurrent, because any train path which traverses a branch end e
hitting Aγ (j + 1) is forced to remain within τj+1 .γ and cannot get back to traversing
e. So, in case τ is recurrent, Σ = [j0 , j1 ] i.e. γ ceases being a twist curve by ceasing
being carried.

85

As for the last claim the lemma’s statement, just restrict the arguments in this
proof to the subsequence τ (J, max Σ): let Aγ (J) := Aγ given in the statement, and
recursively construct the Aγ -family of twist collars.



Remark 2.4.12. In the present Remark we describe how to choose consistent representatives of train tracks and twist collars in a splitting sequence such that a fixed
curve is a twist curve for all tracks in the sequence.
Train tracks and almost tracks are are generally understood to be regarded up to
isotopy, but it is convenient to fix some conventions concerning the way we regard
almost tracks to change along a generic (possibly wide) splitting sequence τ = (τj )N
j=0 ,
when our focus is on a curve γ which stays a twist curve all along the sequence. This
step is necessary because most of this section analyses how to discern the effect of twist
moves from the other ones. Since all the following conventions are only a limitation
when choosing an almost track within its isotopy class, they will be used in the proofs,
but do not affect the validity of the statements. For a matter of convenience, we allow
the sequence τ to include moves which consist of isotopies only.
For all 0 ≤ j ≤ N , we will use the notation Aγ (j) to mean a twist collar for γ in τj
such that {Aγ (j)}N
j=0 is an Aγ (0)-family; and we denote qj the map q : R × [−2, 2] →
X
S (or → S) built as specified in Remark 2.4.4, but with specific reference to the
almost track τj .
It is convenient to communicate the idea behind the adopted conventions before

they are described in detail. For each entry in the sequence qj−1 (τjX ) j , i.e. the
−1
X
) shall not only include
(τj+1
sequence τ lifted to R × [−2, 2], the following entry qj+1

the equator R×{0}, but also appear naturally as a carried realization in qj−1 N (τjX ) .
Unfortunately it is not possible to keep the same map q for all entries in the
sequence, because one has to take into account the change of τj .γ under a bispurious
split, for instance (see Figure 2.9, right): in that case, adjusting τj within its own
isotopy class will not suffice for us to keep the same map q for all entries, and expect
it to behave in compliance with Remark 2.4.4. And the same problem arises when,
albeit τj .γ, τj+1 .γ are isotopic, the isotopy between the two does not keep each point
anchored along its tie in N (τj ).
We start describing the conventions from the following basic case (see also Figure
2.10): let τ be an almost track where γ is a twist curve with twist collar Aγ ; and let
τ 00 , which carries γ, be obtained via the unzip of τ along a zipper κ : [−ε, t) → N̄ (τ )
such that κP is embedded.
Recall the notation used in Definition 2.2.15. Isotope τ 00 so that, if a switch lies
in the set called C there, then there is a switch of τ lying along the same tie of N (τ ).
86

qj−1 (τj )

−1
qj+1
(τj+1 )

κ

xj

xj+1

Figure 2.10: An illustration of the conventions set up in Remark 2.4.12, for a bispurious
parity split, and in particular of its effects seen in R × [−2, 2]. The pictures
show only the changes for a region of qj−1 (τj ) and are not meant to be ac−1
curate. Three pieces of qj−1 (Aγ (j)) and of qj+1
(Aγ (j + 1)) are shown in light
grey. The split in S is equivalent to unzipping a zipper, that lifts to an infinite family including two ones along R × {0}: call κ one of these two. The
main purpose of the set of established conventions is to make sure that, along
a splitting sequence, for all j, τj .γ = qj (R × {0}) and Aγ (j) = qj (R × (0, 1))
while each elementary move leaves the new pretrack naturally carried by the
old one. Note indeed that, in these pictures, as κ is unzipped, the result
of the operation is not embedded as Definition 2.2.15 would describe: it is
slightly altered with an isotopy so that R × {0} stays a lift for τj+1 .γ. No
particular care is needed for any other unzips, far from R × {0}. The map
E = Ej defined in Remark 2.4.12 lifts, via qj , qj+1 , to a map of R × [−2, 2]
which crushes the dark grey regions to a single line, and is a diffeomorphism on the complement of the grey regions (including the ones which are not
drawn). If the split were only spurious, no region would be crushed: Ej would
give a diffeomorphism of R×[−2, 2] — and we may assume that it would give
the identity. Finally, in these pictures two lifts of ramps, ρj , ρj+1 , have been
highlighted with a thicker line: they begin at the same point along R × {−2}
and are both Aγ -adverse. Note that the extremity (xj , 0) of ρj along R × {0}
— here: a fake obstacle — moves along R × {0} in the direction suggested
by the last branch end ρj traverses; and reaches (xj+1 , 0), which is the last
point of the zipper κ. This is because any lift of cτ X ◦ ρj+1 via qj includes
j
a segment along R × {0}, which is not part of ρj . Should ρ0j+1 be such that
cτ X ◦ ρ0j+1 does not include a segment as above, the corresponding ρ0j would
j
end at the same point of R × {0} as ρ0j+1 . Note that, if a lift of an incoming
X begins at a given point a of R × {±2}, then necessarily τ X also
ramp for τj+1
j
has an incoming ramp with one of its lifts beginning at a; but the inverse
implication does not hold.

87

Let Rκ be the union of the ties of N (τ ) intersecting κ. Consider the restriction
cτ |τ 00 .γ of the tie collapse cτ (see §2.1.1), and extend it to a continuous map E :
(S, τ 00 .γ) → (S, τ.γ) with the following properties:
• E is surjective;
• E|S\Rκ = idS\Rκ ;
• E maps each tie segment in N̄ (τ ) to a segment or point of the same tie;
• if C ∩ τj+1 .γ consists of exactly two smooth components4 note that, with the
conditions set up so far, E(N̄ (κ)) = im(κP ): then take E to be a diffeomorphism
between (S \ N̄ (κ), (τ 00 .γ) \ C) and (S \ im(κP ), (τ.γ) \ im(κP ));
• if not, then take E to be a diffeomorphism (S, τ 00 .γ) → (S, τ.γ).
Another equally basic case is the one of two almost tracks τ, τ 00 , both carrying γ,
with τ 00 obtained from τ via a central split, along a branch b. Identify Rb with its
image. Also, identify τ 00 with a carried realization of it in N0 (τ ), with the property
that τ \ Rb = τ 00 \ Rb . Similarly as above, extend cτ |τ 00 .γ to a map E with the same
properties as above, except that we replace Rκ with Rb , define C as the union of the
two ‘copies’ of b produced with the central split, and replace N (κ) with K the union
of the open tie segments in Rb each delimited by two points in C.
In all the above described scenarios, call F the inverse diffeomorphism of E — its
domain and image will depend on the particular case as described above. The map
E gives rise to a unique lift Ê : S X → S X , via the covering map p̂, with the property
that it extends to the identity map on ∂S X .
The twist collar for γ in τ 00 will be supposed to be A00γ = F(Aγ ): this is possible
if the map E is realized appropriately, and/or N (τ 00 ) is chosen wisely (recall indeed
that we want A00γ to be one of the components of N (τ 00 .γ) \ (τ 00 .γ). Given the parametrization q : R × [−2, 2] → S X for τ X , the corresponding parametrization q 00 for
τ 00 X shall be taken to comply with the equality q = Ê ◦ q 00 .
If all the elementary moves produced by unzipping κ are far from γ, it is possible
to take E = F = idS , A00γ = Aγ , q = q 00 , and suppose that τ ∩ N (τ.γ) = τ 00 ∩ N (τ.γ).
If κ decomposes into two shorter zippers κ1 , κ1 , then the respective maps relate
via E(κ) = E(κ2 ) ◦ E(κ1 ) and F(κ) = F(κ1 ) ◦ F(κ2 ). This allows us to give sense to
the maps E, F and to A00γ even if κP is not an embedded path.
Back to the case of a (possibly wide) splitting sequence τ , each move can be
regarded as the combination of one or more unzips. Remark 2.2.18, and Remark 2.2.16
4

Either two connected components which are smooth, or a single connected component consisting
of two smooth paths joined at a cusp. It is exactly when one of these two scenarios occurs that we
cannot keep the parametrization q constant along the sequence τ : and in this case E shall describe
the ‘crush’ of the two pieces of C to a single one.

88

for wide splitting sequences, give some guidelines to convert a splitting sequence into
a sequence of unzips and central splits, albeit not in a unique way. Exceptionally we
will also allow sequences with trivial moves, i.e. unzips that only result in isotopies.
For each index j, then, a continuous surjection Ej : (S, τj+1 .γ) → (S, τj .γ) is
defined by composing the maps E related with each of the unzips and central splits
used to perform the move turning τj into τj+1 . Let Fj be its inverse, defined as the
composition of the maps F seen above where they are defined.
If b is the large branch, mixed branch or carried realization of the splitting arc
involved in the move, then Ej , restricted to S \ Ej−1 (b), is a diffeomorphism with its
image; so S \ b is always included in the domain of Fj . Every time the elementary
move or wide split is far from γ, Ej = Fj = idS .
Denote Êj : S X → S X the lift of Ej as above. As a direct consequence of what
established, the twist collars correspond under Aγ (j + 1) = Fj (Aγ (j)), and in particular {Aγ (j)}N
J=0 is an Aγ (0)-family. Meanwhile, the parametrization maps are be
subject to the condition qj = Êj ◦ qj+1 . If the elementary move/wide split between τj
and τj+1 is far from γ, then τj ∩ N (τj .γ) = τj+1 ∩ N (τj .γ).
Remark 2.2.6 will be used multiple times. In particular, combined with the above
conventions, it gives a constraint on the following construction. Fix i < j, and let
ρj : (−∞, 0] → τjX be any incoming ramp; then there is a unique incoming ramp
ρi : (−∞, 0] → τiX coming from the same point of ∂S X and of the same kind as ρj
(by ‘kind’ we mean hitting, favourable, or adverse; for the uniqueness, see point 6 in
Remark 2.2.9). Actually, as a consequence of the conventions established here, ρi is
an initial segment of (a reparametrization of) cτiX ◦ ρj . Note that this last expression
would not even be well defined, if a carried realization of τj in N (τi ) were not fixed
as we have done in the present Remark.
So, let ρ̂j : (−∞, 0] → R × [−2, 2] be any lift of ρj via qj : it begins at a point
a ∈ R × {−2, 2} and ends at an obstacle xj ∈ R × {0}. There will be a connected
component of qi−1 (im(ρi )) starting at the same point a; it ends at an obstacle xi for
τiX , of the same kind (upper, lower, or fake) as xj for τjX .
The constraint, then, is that xj ≥ xi if they are upper or fake obstacles i.e. if ρi , ρj
are ramps hitting Aγ or Aγ -adverse; and xj ≤ xi if they are lower obstacles i.e. if
ρi , ρj are ramps avoiding Aγ and favourable. The inequalities are strict exactly when
the image of cτi ◦ ρj has more than one point along τiX .γ, implying that one needs to
trim it in order to get ρj .
Figure 2.10 summarizes part of the ideas behind these conventions. Another,
simpler and more restrictive convention, which concerns sequences of twist nature
89

only, will be described in Remark 2.4.14, and it clashes with parts of the assumptions
made above. Therefore in the rest of this section, whenever necessary, we will clarify
which of the two conventions we are about to use.
Definition 2.4.13. A twist modelling function is a smooth map h : R × [0, 1] → R
with the following properties. For all x, t, it holds that
h(x + 2π, t) = h(x, t) + 2π;

∂
∂
h(x, t) > 0 and h(x, t) ≤ 0.
∂x
∂t

Moreover there exists and ε > 0 such that, for all x and for 1 − ε ≤ t < 1, the map
satisfies h(x, t) = x.
Remark 2.4.14. In the present Remark we describe how to choose consistent representatives of train tracks in splitting sequences of twist nature.
Consider a generic splitting sequence of almost tracks τ = (τj )N
j=0 , of twist nature
about a twist curve γ, and let X be a regular neighbourhood of the latter in S. We
use here the notations given in Remark 2.4.4.
As announced in Remark 2.4.12 above, one may apply a different convention from
the one seen there, when it comes to find a concrete realization of τ 00 obtained by
applying a twist split or a twist slide on an almost track τ , about a twist curve γ.
Under this restriction, indeed, it is always possible to make τ.γ and τ 00 .γ coincide
under an isotopy that keeps each point along its tie.
If b ∈ B(τ ), with b ⊆ τ.γ, is the large/mixed branch that is being split/slid, then
exactly one of its endpoints is adjacent to a branch end e hitting Aγ : as it has been
already noted, the result of the elementary move may be visualized as a shift of this
branch end beyond the other endpoint of b.
In order to attain this visualization, the move may be realized with an unzip along
a zipper κ : [−ε, t] → N̄ (τ ) such that κ ([0, t)) is contained in Aγ . In this scenario,
the map E defined in Remark 2.4.12 is a diffeomorphism (isotopic to idS ). But in
this set of conventions, rather than keeping track of the map E, the new track τ 00 is
immediately replaced with F(τ 00 ). This is convenient as Aγ is a twist collar for γ in
τ 00 , too; and τ \ Aγ = τ 00 \ Aγ .
In other words, it becomes useless to appeal to Aγ -families, because there is no
need to adapt the twist collar Aγ . Similarly, in this context the maps υ̃, υ, q of
Remark 2.4.4 are taken to be the same when applying the construction to τ or to τ 00 .
One may apply this convention for an entire sequence of twist nature τ . However,
rather than consider each elementary move as the result of a single unzip, it is better
to keep the model less rigid: an elementary move may as well be the result of unzipping
90

more than a zipper as described above, posing the condition that all unzips but one
result into isotopies of the almost track. This makes sure that constructions like the
one in Lemma 2.4.15 work properly.
The argument concerning endpoints of ramps, developed in Remark 2.4.12, applies
in this set of conventions, too; but the twist nature of the sequence limits the variety
of possible behaviours. Given an almost track τ where we unzip a zipper κ as specified
above, there is exactly one coset x + 2πZ ⊂ R, where x is an upper obstacle, such
that all obstacles (whether upper, lower or fake) of τ X which do not belong to this
coset are found also as obstacles of (τ 00 )X .
Define the obstacles xi , xj similarly as in that paragraph. Then xj ≥ xi if they are
upper obstacles, and xj = xi if they are lower or fake obstacles. The first inequality
is strict only when xi belongs to one of the families of upper obstacles x + Z which
are affected by the unzips along τ (i, j).
Moreover, if one defines similarly two pairs (xi , xj ) and (x0i , x0j ), then xi = x0i if
and only if xj = x0j . In words, two ramps in τiX have their images partly overlapping
if and only if their counterparts in τjX partly overlap (possibly they only have one
common endpoint).
This establishes a correspondence between sequences of twist nature and twist
modelling functions, as we explain below.
Given a twist modelling function h, one can use it to define a self-diffeomorphism
h̃ of R × [0, 1], by sending (x, t) 7→ (h(x, t), t); and it can also be extended to a map
h̃ : R × [−2, 2] → R × [−2, 2], by setting it to the identity outside R × [0, 1]. This
map h̃ is not continuous, as it fails along R × {0}. We call H̃ := υ̃ ◦ h̃ ◦ υ̃ −1 the
corresponding self-bijection of H̄2X → H̄2X .
Since h̃ is equivariant under horizontal translation by 2π, it descends to a selfbijection of S1 × [−2, 2] on S X and, via conjugation by υ, the latter is turned into a
self-bijection Ĥ : S X → Ĥ.
Finally, a map H : S → S is obtained by setting H|Aγ = Ĥ|Aγ and H|S\Aγ :=
idS\Aγ . This is again not continuous, but it is a self-diffeomorphism of S \ τ0 .γ which
does not permute its connected components. Note a detail: H fixes τ0 .γ pointwise,
but Ĥ and H̃ fix τ0X .γ and γ̃, respectively, only setwise.
One can see (cfr. [Mos03], p. 215) that, after modelling τ under the conventions
given above, for each pair of indices 0 ≤ k ≤ l ≤ N , there exists a twist modelling
function hlk : R × [0, 1] → R such that τl = Hkl (τk ), where Hkl is defined with the
process above; and we can also suppose that, given three indices 0 ≤ k ≤ l ≤ r ≤ N ,

it holds that hrk (x, t) = hrl kkl (x, t), t i.e. h̃rk = h̃rl ◦ h̃lk and similar composition rules
91

hold for the maps defined above. We will say that hlk is a twist modelling function
associated with the splitting sequence τ (k, l).
Lemma 2.4.15. Let τ0 be a generic almost track on a surface S with γ a twist curve,
and Aγ a fixed twist collar. Let h : R×[0, 1] → R be a twist modelling function. Define
a bijection H : S → S as in Remark 2.4.14.
Suppose that τ1 := H(τ0 ) is a (generic) almost track; equivalently that, for any x
upper obstacle for τ0X , h(x, 0) is not a lower or fake obstacle of τ0X . Then there exists
a splitting sequence τ turning τ0 into τ1 , and having twist nature about γ with twist
collar Aγ . Moreover, τ has h as an associated twist modelling function.
Proof. Consider the smooth map Φ : R×[0, 1]×[0, 1] → R×[0, 1] defined by the linear
combination Φ(x, t, u) = (1 − u)x + uh(x, t). For all u ∈ [0, 1] the map hu (x, t) :=
Φ(x, t, u) is a twist modelling function; let h̃u be the corresponding self-map of R ×
∂
[−2, 2], defined as prescribed in Remark 2.4.14. We have ∂u
Φ(x, t, u) ≥ 0 for all x, t, u
and

∂
Φ(x, t, u)
∂u

= 0 if and only if h1 (x, t) = x.

For all u let Hu be the self-map induced by hu on S. Up to small perturbations of
Φ not affecting the previously listed properties, one can also suppose that for every
fixed u ∈ [0, 1], one of the following is true:
• there is one coset x0 (u) + 2πZ such that, if x is an upper obstacle for τ0X while
hu (x, 0) is a lower or fake obstacle for τ0X , then x ∈ x0 (u) + 2πZ;
• if x is an upper obstacle for τ0X , then hu (x, 0) is neither a lower nor fake obstacle
for τ0X .
Let 0 < u1 < . . . < uk < 1 be the values of u as in the first bullet. Define, for
u ∈ [0, 1], τu = Hu (τ0 ): it is a generic almost track exactly when u is none of the
aforementioned values.
Given two values 0 ≤ u < u0 ≤ 1: if there is a j such that uj < u < u0 < uj+1
then τu , τu0 are turned into each other with an isotopy of S. If there is exactly one
value of j such that u < uj < u0 then τu0 is obtained from τu by shifting exactly one
branch end hitting Aγ beyond a branch end that avoids it (plus an isotopy); which is
the same as saying: via a twist slide or a twist splitting.
So if we define another sequence v0 , . . . , vk such that 0 ≤ v0 < u1 < v1 < u2 <
. . . < vk−1 < uk < vk ≤ 1, then τ = (τvj )kj=0 is the desired splitting sequence, with
twist nature.
Remark 2.4.16.


1. Given any increasing function η : R → R such that η(x) ≥ x

for all x, there is a twist modelling function h : R × [0, 1] → R such that
h|R×{0} = η.
92

2. Fix a generic almost track τ carrying a twist curve γ; fix Aγ and the other
complementary constructions given in Remark 2.4.4. Given any two twist modelling functions h, h0 and the relative maps H, H 0 : S → S built from them,
suppose that h|R×{0} = h0 |R×{0} and that H(τ ) is a train track. Then H 0 (τ )
is also a train track, isotopic to the former one: the isotopy is made explicit
by the 1-parameter family Hu (τ ), where u ∈ [0, 1] and Hu is the self-map of S
obtained from the twist modelling function hu = (1 − u)h + uh0 .
3. A particular case of twist modelling function is given by the ones giving h(x, 1) =
x + 2πm for some fixed m ∈ N. We consider these maps in the setting specified
in Remark 2.4.14. Due to the 2π-periodicity in the x variable, the corresponding
maps Ĥ and H are continuous; and, due to the point above, one may as well
suppose that they are smooth, up to isotopy. If ε is the sign of γ as a twist
εm
, where DX is the Dehn twist of S X about its
curve, then Ĥ is isotopic to DX

core curve; and H is isotopic to Dγεm , where Dγ is the Dehn twist of S about γ.

2.4.3

The wide arc set at a twist curve

We introduce a few more notations and immediate remarks about the arcs carried by
an induced track in an annulus. We use here the parametrization of Remark 2.4.4.
This definition integrates the definition of horizontal stretch given in point 5 in
Remark 2.2.9:
Definition 2.4.17. Let τ be a generic almost track where a specified curve γ is a
twist curve with a specified twist collar Aγ , and let X be a regular neighbourhood of
γ. For α ∈ C(τ X ), let ατ be a realization of α as a train path along τ X , and let α̃τ be
a lift of it to the universal cover H̄2X of S X . The train path α̃τ is necessarily embedded
in τ̃ , and traverses one or more branches belonging to τ̃ .γ̃, which we already know to
be consecutive.
An interval stretch is an interval [x, y] such that [x, y] × {0} = υ̃ −1 (γ̃ ∩ α̃τ ) =
(R × {0}) ∩ υ̃ −1 (α̃τ ); there is one for each choice of α̃τ , so they are a family of
intervals obtained from one another via addition of a Z-multiple of 2π. Necessarily,
x is an upper obstacle for τ X and y is a lower one (see Remark 2.4.5).
Finally, we call the horizontal length of α the length of any of these intervals:
hl(τ, α) := y − x (this is independent of the choice of α̃τ ).
If τ = (τj )N
j=0 is a splitting sequence of almost tracks such that γ stays a twist
curve throughout, and α ∈ C(τiX ) we may denote, leaving that sequence implicit,
hlα (i) = hl(τi , α); αi = ατi . In that case we choose the family α̃j , for 0 ≤ j ≤ i, to be
93

consisting of arcs all having the same pair of endpoints along ∂ H̄2 . We denote [xj , yj ]
the corresponding interval stretches, and hlα (j) = hl(τj , α).
We list some basic properties of the horizontal length:
1. With x, y as in the above definition, consider the two segments of υ̃ −1 (α̃τ ) \
((x, y) × {0}), i.e. the two lifts of ramps of ατ . The one having an endpoint at
(x, 0) is contained in R × [0, 2] i.e. it projects to a ramp hitting Aγ in S X ; while
the other one is contained in R × [−2, 0] so it projects to a ramp which avoids
Aγ and is favourable.
2. For any α ∈ C(τ ), hl(τ, α) is never a multiple of 2π. If it were, that would
mean that hs(τ, α) begins and ends at the same switch along τ X .γ. But this is
impossible, because one of the two ramps composing τ X .α \ τ X .γ hits Aγ and
the other one avoids it: by genericness of τ , they do not meet τ X .γ at the same
switch.
3. bhl(τ, α)/2πc is the minimum number of times α travels along a fixed branch
within τ X .γ. In particular this quantity is independent of metric properties
and realization of τ within a given isotopy class. Moreover there is at least one
branch traversed bhl(τ, α)/2πc + 1 times.
4. An arc α ∈ C(τ X ) is wide carried if and only if hl(τ, α) < 2π: this bound
on horizontal length is equivalent to saying that hs(τ, α) does not traverse all
branches in τ X .γ. Remark 2.2.9, point 4, concludes our argument.
5. Let τ be a splitting sequence as in Definition 2.4.17, and fix 0 ≤ j < N . Suppose
the move between τj and τj+1 is far from γ. Then, if the conventions of Remark
X
), hsα (j + 1) ⊆ hsα (j). If the move
2.4.12 are used then, for any α ∈ C(τj+1

between τj and τj+1 is far from γ, then hsα (j) = hsα (j + 1).
X
As a consequence of point 5, a train path realization αj+1 of α in τj+1
is the
f
X
h
h
concatenation of ρj+1 , hsα (j +1), ρj+1 for ρj+1 an incoming ramp for τj+1 hitting

Aγ , and ρfj+1 an outgoing ramp avoiding Aγ and favourable.
A train path realization αj = cτjX (αj+1 ) — here we are neglecting any necessary reparametrization — is the concatenation of cτjX (ρhj+1 ), cτjX (hsα (j + 1)) =
hsα (j + 1), cτjX (ρfj+1 ): hence hsα (j + 1) ⊆ hsα (j).
When the move that takes place between τj , τj+1 is far from γ, the conventions in
Remark 2.4.12 imply that neither cτjX (ρhj+1 ) nor cτjX (ρfj+1 ) include any segment
along τjX .γ. So hsα (j) = hsα (j + 1).
6. Let τ be a splitting sequence as in Definition 2.4.17, with twist nature about γ,
and fix two indices 0 ≤ k ≤ l ≤ N . Model τ as said in Remark 2.4.14, and

94

let h be the twist modelling function h associated with τ (k, l). Let α ∈ V (τl ),
and let [xk , yk ], [xl , yl ] be two consistent choices of interval stretches for α in τk
and τl , respectively; then yk = yl and xl = h(xk , 0) ≥ xk ; and, in particular,
hlα (l) ≤ hlα (k).
Under the conventions of Remark 2.4.14, α̃l \ p−1 (Āγ ) = α̃k \ p−1 (Āγ ), and this
implies that α̃l \(R×{0}) = H̃ (α̃l \ (R × {0})). This gives immediately yk = yl ,
and xl = h(xk , 0).
Lemma 2.4.18. Let τ be a generic almost track, and let γ be a twist curve with sign
ε and X a regular neighbourhood of it. Then the following are true.
• For each m ∈ N,
εm
DX
· V (τ X ) = {α ∈ C(τ X ) | 2πm < hl(τ, α) < 2π(m + 1)}

where DX is the Dehn twist about γ in S X . In particular, for all α ∈ V (τ X ),
εm
(α)) = hl(τ, α) + 2πm; and
hl(τ, DX

C(τ X ) =

[

εj
DX
· V (τ X ).

j≥0
εm
· V (τ X ) then m − 1 ≤ i(α, β) ≤ m + 1. In
• If m ∈ N, α ∈ V (τ X ), β ∈ DX

particular, diam V (τ X ) ≤ 2.

Proof. The first equality in the first bullet has been shown, in the particular case
m = 0, in point 4 of the above list. For m > 0: given α ∈ V (τ X ), construct α̃τ and
the corresponding interval stretch [x, y] as prescribed in Definition 2.4.17.
Let ρ̃+ = α̃τ ∩ (R × (0, 2]) and ρ̃− = α̃τ ∩ (R × [−2, 0)). Define then ρ0− :=
{(x0 + 2πm, y 0 ) ∈ R × [−2, 0)|(x0 , y 0 ) ∈ ρ− }, and β̃ τ := ρ+ ∪ [x, y + 2πm] × {0} ∪ ρ0− .
The path specified by β = q(β̃ τ ) ⊂ S X is then a train path along τ , realizing some
β ∈ C(τ X ). By construction, hl(τ, β) = hl(τ, α) + 2πm ∈ (2πm, 2π(m + 1)); and
εm
β = Dεm (α). Since all β ∈ DX
· V (τ X ) may be realized this way, this construction
proves the ⊆ inclusion in the given equality.

To show the opposite inclusion, we can pick any α ∈ C(τ X ) with 2πm < hl(τ, α) <
2π(m + 1) and define ρ̃+ , ρ̃− as above. Then we define ρ0− = {(x0 − 2πm, y 0 ) ∈
R × [−2, 0)|(x0 , y 0 ) ∈ ρ− }, and β̃ τ = ρ+ ∪ [x, y − 2πm] × {0} ∪ ρ0− (note that, due to
our hypothesis on α, y > x + 2πm). Then, similarly as above, this gives β ∈ C(τ X )
εm
with α = DX
(β). Moreover 0 < hl(β) < 2π, hence β ∈ V (τ X ).

The second equality of the first bullet is immediate.

95

A preliminary discussion for the second bullet: we have seen in Lemma 2.4.7 that
τ |X consists of τ X .γ plus a forest σ of trees each having its root along τ X .γ. Let
P ⊂ R be the set such that P × {0} = q −1 (switches of τ X along τ X .γ); and let ν > 0
be small, to be constrained more precisely in a bit. In the conventions set up in
Remark 2.4.4, we may add the further request that
υ̃ −1 (σ) ⊆

[

(a − ν, a + ν) × [−2, 2].

a∈P

Then, let α ∈ C(τ X ) and α̃τ be defined as above. Also, let α− = α̃τ ∩ R × {−2}, α+ =
α̃τ ∩ R × {2} be the two endpoints of α̃τ . Let seg(α) be defined as the straight
line segment joining α− with α+ : since seg(α) and α̃τ are isotopic relatively to their
endpoints, q (seg(α)) is a representative of the isotopy class α ∈ C(X).
Given any X ⊂ R × [−2, 2], j ∈ Z, denote X + j = {(a + 2πj, b)|(a, b) ∈ X}; and
S
O(X) = j∈Z (X + j).
However we pick another α 6= β ∈ C(τ X ), the collection of segments O (seg(α)) ∪
O (seg(β)) does not bound any bigon, so q (seg(α) ∪ seg(β)) does neither. Hence,
i(α, β) is the number of points of O (seg(α)) ∩ seg(β); which is the same as saying,
the number of j ∈ Z such that seg(α) + j intersects seg(β).
εm
Now take m ∈ N, α ∈ V (τ X ), β ∈ DX
· V (τ X ) as in the second bullet in the
statement. Let [x, y] be the interval stretch for α corresponding to a definite choice

of α̃τ , and [z, w] the one for a choice of a lift β̃ τ . Also, let α+ = (x0 , 2), α− =
(y 0 , −2), β+ = (z 0 , 2), β− = (w0 , −2): we have |x0 − x| < ν and similarly for the other
letters. If ν is small, then y 0 > x0 and z 0 > w0 .
We claim that, without loss of generality, one may suppose y 0 −x0 < w0 −z 0 . Recall
indeed that 0 < y − x < 2π and 2πm < z − w < 2π(m + 1). So, if m > 0 and ν is
small enough, then also y 0 − x0 < w0 − z 0 ; whereas, if m = 0, the roles of α and β can
be swapped, so the same supposition can be done by symmetry after discarding the
only case left out: y 0 − x0 = w0 − z 0 . In this special case, indeed seg(α) and seg(β) + j
are parallel for any j, so i(α, β) = 0 consistently with our statement.
Now, seg(α) + j intersects seg(β) if and only if their respective endpoints along
R × {2} come in the reverse order with respect to the ones on R × {−2}. And, as
y 0 − x0 < w0 − z 0 , this condition is verified if and only if [x0 + 2πj, y 0 + 2πj] ⊆ (z 0 , w0 )
i.e. j ∈

1
(z 0
2π

− x0 , w0 − y 0 ): we estimate how many integer j lie within this interval.

From an algebraic manipulation of the above inequalities involving x, y, z, w we
get, on the one hand, w − y > z − x + 2π(m − 1). If ν is small enough, we have also
w − y − 2ν > z − x + 2π(m − 1) + 2ν, hence (z 0 − x0 , w0 − y 0 ) ⊇ (z − x + 2ν, w − y − 2ν) ⊇

96

(z−x+2ν, z−x+2ν +2π(m−1)) — we agree that an interval is empty if its supremum
is lower than its infimum. In this last interval there are exactly m − 1 elements of
2πZ, so the possible values of j are at least as many: i(α, β) ≥ m − 1.
On the other hand, a similar manipulation gives w − y < z − x + 2π(m + 1)
and, again for ν small enough, w − y + 2ν < z − x + 2π(m − 1) − 2ν. Hence
(z 0 − x0 , w0 − y 0 ) ⊆ (z − x − 2ν, w − y + 2ν) ⊆ (z − x − 2ν, z − x − 2ν + 2π(m + 1)). Since
in this last interval there are exactly m + 1 elements of 2πZ, we get i(α, β) ≤ m + 1.
The last claim in the statement is a direct application of Lemma 1.2.6.

We introduce the following definition to measure how many complete Dehn twists
are induced by a twist splitting sequence:
Definition 2.4.19. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic splitting sequence of almost tracks
such that a twist curve γ stays a twist curve throughout, with a given Aγ -family of
twist collars.
We define the rotation number about γ of a subsequence τ (k, l) as

 

hlα (k)
hlα (l)
rotτ (γ, k, l) := min
−
.
α∈C(τl |X)
2π
2π
When some of the data is understood from the context we will use a lighter notation
such as rot(γ, k, l) or rot(k, l); or rotτ (γ), rotτ when the rotation number is computed
on the entire splitting sequence rather than a subsequence.
Remark 2.4.20. We give some basic facts related with the rotation number, using
the same notations already set up in the definition above.
1. If 0 ≤ k ≤ r ≤ l ≤ N , then
This is kjustjbecause
j rot(k,
k l)j ≥ rot(k,
k r) + rot(r, l). j
k
hlα (k)
hlα (r)
hlα (r)
hlα (l)
rot(k, l) ≥ minα∈C(τl |X)
−
+
min
−
α∈C(τl |X)
2π
2π
2π
2π
≥ rot(k, r) + rot(r, l). The second inequality is explained by replacing the
minimum in the first summand with the one taken on the
k set C(τr |X).
j larger
hlα (k)
2. An alternative definition is rotτ (γ, k, l) = minα∈V (τl |X) 2π . In particular
the rotation number is always nonnegative.
We can replace the minimum over C(τl |X) with the one over V (τl |X) because
of Lemma 2.4.18.
3. If τ (k, l) is a splitting sequence of twist nature, associated with a twist modelling
function h having h(x, 0) = x + 2πm for some m ∈ N (i.e. a neighbourhood of
γ in S differs, from τk to τl , according to the self-map H = Dγεm : S → S) then
rot(k, l) = m. This is a simple consequence of point 6 after Definition 2.4.17.

97

4. If 0 ≤ k ≤ r ≤ l ≤ N and τ (r, l) is a sequence consisting of slides only then
rot(k, r) = rot(k, l). Since the inverse of a slide move is also a slide move, from
point 1 in this list we get rot(k, r) ≤ rot(k, l) ≤ rot(k, r).
5. The rotation number is not affected by changing the train tracks within their
isotopy class and changing the choice for the parametrizations defined in Remark
2.4.4.
6. If m = rot(k, l), then
 

  ε(m+1)
ε(m+2)
εm
V (τlX ) ⊆ DX
· V (τkX ) ∪ DX
· V (τkX ) ∪ DX
· V (τkX ) .
This is a consequence of Lemma 2.4.18. By definition of rotation number,
S
εj
hlα (k) > 2πm for all α ∈ V (τlX ), and so V (τlX ) ⊆ j≥m DX
· V (τkX ). Fix α
εm
realizing the minimum in the definition of rot(k, l): then α = DX
(α0 ) for some

α0 ∈ V (τkX ).



ε(m+j)
Given any β ∈ V (τlX ) ∩ DX
· V (τkX ) for a fixed j ≥ 0, write corresεj
εm
(β 0 ) for β 0 ∈ DX
· V (τkX ). Then said Lemma implies that
pondingly β = DX

i(α, β) = i(α0 , β 0 ) ≥ j − 1 while, on the other hand, i(α, β) ≤ 1 because these
two arcs both belong to V (τlX ). So j ≤ 2, as required.

7. If m = rot(k, l), then m ≤ dC(X) V (τkX ), V (τlX ) ≤ m + 4.
This is a consequence of the point above and Lemma 2.4.18. The core of the
argument is that, if α ∈ V (τkX ) and β ∈ V (τlX ) are distinct, then m − 1 ≤
i(α, β) ≤ m + 3 andj Lemma
gives
k 1.2.6
j
k m ≤ dC(X) (α, β) ≤ m + 4.
hl
(k)
hl
(l)
α
α
8. If α ∈ C(τlX ) then
− 2π
≤ rot(k, l) + 2.
2π
Point 6 together with Lemma 2.4.18 give this for α ∈ V (τlX ) first, and then for
all α ∈ C(τlX ).
X
9. If 0 ≤ k ≤ r ≤ l ≤ N , then rot(k, l) ≤ rot(k, r) + rot(r,
α ∈ C(τ
jl) + 2.k If j
kl )
hlα (k)
α (r)
realizes the minimum defining rot(r, l) then rot(k, l) ≤
− hl2π
+
2π
rot(r, l) and we use the point above.

10. If τ (k, l) is a splitting sequence of twist nature, associated with a twist modelling
function h, then h(x, 0) < x + 2π(rot(k, l) + 3) for all x ∈ R which are upper
obstacles for τkX .
For each x upper obstacle for τkX there are some α ∈ V (τlX ) and y > x such that
[x, y] is an interval stretch for α with respect to τk ; from point 6 above, y − x =
hlα (k) < 2π(rot(k, l) + 3); on the other hand, because of point 6 after Definition
2.4.17, y − h(x) = hlα (l) ∈ (0, 2π); therefore h(x) − x ≤ 2π(rot(k, l) + 3).

98

Lemma 2.4.21 (Dehn twists with remainder). Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic splitting sequence of almost tracks on a surface S which has twist nature about a fixed curve
γ with sign ε. Suppose the sequence is modelled according to Remark 2.4.14, with a
fixed twist collar Aγ . Let m := rotτ (γ, 0, N ).
00

Then there is another splitting sequence τ 0 = (τj )N
j=0 with twist nature about γ;
there are two indices 0 < N 0 ≤ N 00 and a factorization N 00 − N 0 = mk, such that:
• τ00 = τ0 , and τN0 00 is obtained from τN with slides only;
• rotτ 0 (γ, 0, N 0 ) = 0;
0
• for any choice of indices N 0 ≤ j < j + k ≤ N 00 , τj+k
= Dγε (τj0 ), where Dγ is the

Dehn twist about γ in S. In particular, τN0 00 = Dγεm (τN 0 ).
Proof. Let X be a regular neighbourhood of γ, and h be the twist modelling function
associated with τ (0, N ).
Step 1: make sure that h(x, 0), 0 ≥ x + 2πm, possibly operating further slides.
This step is devoted to defining recursively the entries of an extension τ (N, N 000 )
of the splitting sequence τ . This extension will also be of twist nature, with no splits,
but with the possibility that some τj+1 is isotopic to τj .
The extension will be associated with a twist modelling function h000 , such that
h000 (h(x, 0), 0) ≥ x + 2πm for all x ∈ R. Actually, it will suffice to show that this
inequality holds for every x which is an upper obstacle for τ0X . If this is true, one will
be able to adapt h000 so that the inequality holds for all x ∈ R, without changing τN 000 .
We fix some notation for the entries τ (N, N 000 ), which we are about to build. For
0 ≤ j ≤ N 000 − N , label βj0 , . . . , βjr the segments of (τN +j |X).γ delimited by two
switches, and such that their extremities are located at large branch ends. Due to
Lemma 2.4.6, these segments are exactly the ones which can be obtained as hsα (N +j)
for some α ∈ V (τNX+j ); of course, all the α defining the same segment have the same
hlα (N + j), and we call it hl(βji ).
Note that, as τ is a splitting sequence of twist nature, two elements α, α0 ∈
V (τNX+j ) have hsα (N + j) = hsα0 (N + j) if and only if hsα (N + j 0 ) = hsα0 (N + j 0 )
for each j 0 ≤ j: it is just another way of phrasing the behaviour of obstacles along a
sequence which was noted in Remark 2.4.14. This observation establishes a natural
bijection between the collections (βji )i , (βji0 )i for j < j 0 : i.e. two segments βji and
0

βji0 may be supposed to comply with the condition i = i0 ⇐⇒ there is an element
0

α ∈ V (τNX+j 0 ) such that βji = hsα (N + j) and βji0 = hsα (N + j 0 ).
For each i, then, fix an αi ∈ V (τNX ) = V (τNX+1 ) = . . . = V (τNX000 ) such that
hsαi (τN +j ) = βji for all j.
99

0

Furthermore, we assign superscripts so that βji ⊂ βji ⇒ i < i0 . In order to get
this condition one may impose, for instance, that the sequence (hl(β0i ))i is increasing.
0

0

i
i
for all 0 ≤ j <
⊂ βj+1
The slides along the sequence will then force βji ⊂ βji ⇒ βj+1

N 000 − N .
During the course of our recursion, each almost track τN +j will have the following
property:
hl(βji ) ≤ hlαi (0) − 2πm for all i ≤ j.
The sequence will then stop at the index N 000 = N + r. At that point, recall point
6 after Definition 2.4.17: given any upper obstacle x for τ0X , there is an αi such that
two consistent choices for interval stretches of αi with respect to τ0 and τN 000 turn
out to be [x, y] and [h000 (h(x, 0), 0), y] respectively, for some y ∈ R lower obstacle for
both τ0X , τNX000 . This implies hlαi (j) ≤ hlαi (0) − 2πm ⇒ h000 (h(x, 0), 0) > x + 2πm, as
desired.
We now enter the recursive process: suppose that τN +j has been defined for some
0 ≤ j < N 000 − N : we construct τN +j+1 . If hlαj+1 (N + j) < hlαj+1 (0) − 2πm, then
it is fine to set τN +j+1 = τN +j . Else, denote [x0 , y], [ξ, y] two consistent choices for
interval stretches of αj+1 with respect to τ0 and τN +j , respectively. By assumption,
ξ < x0 + 2πm.
We claim the following:
• there exists a twist modelling function hj such that hj (ξ +2πζ, 1) = x0 +2π(m+
ζ) for all ζ ∈ Z, and h(x, 1) = x for any x 6∈ ξ + 2πZ which is an upper obstacle
for τNX+j ;
• given Hj the self-map of S derived from hj with the construction given in
Remark 2.4.14, τN +j+1 := Hj (τN +j ) is isotopic, or obtained with twist slides
only, from τN +j .
j+1
If it is possible to define τN +j+1 this way, then hl(βj+1
) = y − hj (ξ, 0) = y − x0 −
i
2πm = hlαj (0) − 2πm; and for, i ≤ j, hl(βj+1
) ≤ hl(βji ) ≤ hlαi (0) − 2πm as required

by the property claimed above.
The claim in the first bullet is true if and only if the interval (ξ, x0 +2πm] contains
no upper obstacles for τNX+j (see also Remark 2.4.16), and the one in the second bullet
is true if and only if (ξ, x0 + 2πm] contains no lower obstacles for τNX+j .
Suppose that an upper or lower obstacle ξ¯ exists in the specified segment, for
¯ and [ξ,
¯ y] is a connected component of
a contradiction. Then one between [ξ, ξ]
q −1 (βji ), for some i; clearly i ≤ j, because by construction βji ⊆ βjj+1 . Therefore
hl(βji ) ≤ hlαi (0) − 2πm.
100

¯ is the one of the two segments which makes a
If ξ¯ is a lower obstacle, then [ξ, ξ]
connected component of q −1 (βji ). But then hl(βji ) ≤ hlαi (0) − 2πm implies ξ ≥ x0 +
¯ y] is a connected
2πm, contrary to the assumption. If ξ¯ is an upper obstacle, then [ξ,
component of q −1 (βji ). Let [x̄0 , y] be an interval stretch for αi in τ0X , consistent with
¯ y] related to τ X . The hypothesis hl(β i ) = hlαi (N + j) ≤
the fixed interval stretch [ξ,
N +j

j

hlαi (0) − 2πm translates into x̄0 ≤ ξ¯ − 2πm. On the other hand, since ξ¯ ≤ x0 + 2πm
by definition, we get x̄0 ≤ x0 ; and this is impossible as it would imply β0i ⊇ β0j+1
j+1
i
while βN
+j ( βN +j .
This concludes the recursion argument. The claimed twist modelling function for
τ (N, N 000 ) is, of course, h000 := hN 000 −N −1 ◦ · · · ◦ h0 .
Step 2: proof of the lemma.
We can now change the notation partially: remove from τ (N, N 000 ) any τj such
that τj+1 is isotopic to it (the value of N 000 decreases accordingly). Moreover, since
the original h will not be needed, for a simpler notation let h be the twist modelling
map associated with the entire sequence τ (0, N 000 ). Call H the self-bijection of S
that one obtains from h. Furthermore, consider a twist modelling function hD (and,
consequently, a map HD : S → S) defined with the condition that hD (x, 0) = x+2π =:
ηD (x). According to what noted in Remark 2.4.16, such a map hD exists, and HD is
a diffeomorphism of S, in the isotopy class of Dγε .
Consider now the function η 0 : R → R defined by η 0 (x) = h(x, 0) − 2πm. Clearly
η 0 is a strictly increasing function; also, η(x) ≥ x since, by construction, h(x, 0) ≥
x + 2πm. So, again, it is possible to find a twist modelling function h0 : R × [0, 1] → R
with h0 |R×{0} = η 0 (with the relative map H 0 : S → S).
The composition (ηD )m ◦ η 0 agrees with h|R×{0} . So, according to what noted in
Remark 2.4.16, (HD )m ◦ H 0 (τ0 ) is isotopic to H(τ ) = τN 000 .
The new sequence τ 0 is then the concatenation of m + 1 sequences, each obtained
from an application of Lemma 2.4.15. The first one, τ 0 (0, N 0 ), is a splitting sequence
of twist nature built from τ0 and h0 : the Lemma’s hypotheses are met, as by definition
H 0 (τ0 ) = Dγ−εm ◦ H(τ0 ) is a generic almost track.
Let α ∈ V (τNX000 ) be an arc realizing the minimum in the definition of rotτ (0, N 000 );
then hlα (0) ∈ (2πm, 2π(m + 1)), so if [x0 , y] and [xN 000 , y] are interval stretches for
α in τ0 and τN 000 respectively, then x0 ∈ (y − 2π(m + 1), y − 2πm) and xN 000 =
h(x0 , 0) ∈ (y − 2π, y). An interval stretch for α in τN0 0 is instead [ξ, y] where ξ =
η 0 (x0 ) = h(x0 , 0) − 2πm ∈ (y − 2π(m + 1), y − 2πm). So, in the sequence τ 0 , both
hlα (0), hlα (N 0 ) ∈ (2πm, 2π(m + 1)) and this implies that rotτ 0 (0, N 0 ) = 0.

101

Another subsequence τ 0 (N 0 , N 0 +k) will turn τN 0 into HD (τN 0 ); and, for 1 ≤ j < m,
one can consistently define τ 0 (N 0 + kj) = (HD )j · τ 0 (N 0 , N 0 + k) — i.e. transforming
each entry of τ 0 (N 0 , N 0 + k) under (HD )j . Set N 00 := N 0 + km: by definition, τN0 00 =
τN 000 .



Lemma 2.4.22. Let N3 = N3 (S) be a constant such that, given any generic almost
track τ on S, and any twist curve γ for τ , for each side of τ N (γ) .γ and any orientation
on γ there are at most N3 branch ends sharing a switch with τ N (γ) .γ, located on the
specified side and giving γ the required orientation.
If τ = (τj )N
j=0 is a splitting sequence of almost tracks and τ (k, l) has twist nature
about γ ∈ W (τk ), then the number of twist splits in τ is bounded by N32 (rot(k, l) + 3).
Proof. The existence of the constant N3 is just a consequence of more general bounds
on combinatorics of almost tracks (Lemma 2.1.18).
Model the sequence τ (k, l) in accordance with Remark 2.4.14. Every time τj+1
X
is obtained from τj with a twist split, then τj+1
is obtained from τjX with infinitely

many splits, only one of which is a twist split along γ. So we count the number of
0
those twist splits instead. For k ≤ j < j 0 ≤ l, let hjj be the twist modelling function
associated with τ (j, j 0 ).
Denote . . . y −1 , y 0 , y 1 , . . . the ordered biinfinite sequence in R of lower obstacles for
τkX — suppose for simplicity that y 0 = 0; and let x1k , . . . , xrk be the upper obstacles for
τkX lying within the interval (0, 2π); these have a natural bijection with the branch
ends in τkX hitting Aγ .
Note that, according to the conventions as in Remark 2.4.14, . . . y −1 , y 0 , y 1 , . . .
are lower obstacles for τjX for all j ≥ k, too. For each k < j ≤ l we define instead
xij := hjk (xik ) for i = 1, . . . , r. Each xij is an upper obstacle for the respective τjX .
So each sequence (xij )j describes the alterations of a branch end in τk , hitting Aγ ,
along the sequence τ (k, l): the position of its endpoint along the carrying image of γ
changes along the sequence, moving long a direction specified by the Aγ -orientation
on γ. As already specified in Remark 2.4.14, j 0 > j ⇒ xij 0 ≥ xij .
The elementary move between τj and τj+1 , then, is a (twist) splitting if and only
if there are two indices 1 ≤ a ≤ r, b ≥ 0 such that xaj < y b < xaj+1 . In this case the
choice for the indices a, b is unique.
As a consequence of point 10 in Remark 2.4.20, for each i = 1, . . . , r we have
xil < xik + 2π(rot(k, l) + 3). In each interval [2πζ, 2π(ζ + 1)), ζ ∈ N, there can be
at most N3 lower obstacles of any fixed τjX , because they must be lifts of endpoints
of distinct branch ends avoiding Aγ and favourable. Hence, in the splitting sequence
102

τ , between each xik and the corresponding xil there at most N3 (rot(k, l) + 3) lower
obstacles (of any of the tracks in the sequence). The total number of splits in τ is
bounded by total number of indices j such that a choice of a, b as above exists: since
also r ≤ N3 , a bound is N32 (rot(k, l) + 3).

Lemma 2.4.23. Suppose that, in a generic splitting sequence τ of almost tracks on a
surface S, a curve γ is a twist curve for some τj , τj+1 and the elementary move between
these two train tracks is not a twist split about γ. Let X be a regular neighbourhood
of γ. Then V (τj+1 |X) ⊆ V (τj |X).
Proof. It suffices to prove the statement in the case the move occurring is a split
which is spurious or far from γ. Suppose that α ∈ V (τj+1 |X) fails to be wide in τj |X,
i.e. hlα (j) > 2π while hlα (j +1) < 2π: by point 5 after Definition 2.4.17, we have that
the split may only be spurious, because bhlα (j)/2πc and bhlα (j + 1)/2πc are distinct
quantities, and both well-defined up to isotopies.
Let b ⊆ τj .γ be the branch that is about to be split. We use the conventions set
up in Remark 2.4.12 and repeat the notation used in the first paragraph there. Also,
let α̃j , α̃j+1 be two lifts of αj , αj+1 via the maps qj , qj+1 respectively, with the same
endpoints on R × [−2, 2]. Let [xj , yj ] be the interval stretch for α in τjX consistent
with the choice of the lift α̃j , and define [xj+1 , yj+1 ] similarly, replacing all occurrences
of the index j with j + 1. As a consequence of Remark 2.4.5, the points xj , xj+1 are
upper obstacles while yj , yj+1 are lower ones.
Since the split is spurious, p̂−1 (Rb ) has 1 or 2 components intersecting τjX .γ (as
many as the number of times b is traversed by γ).
In the rest of the proof, square brackets will enclose adaptations that apply for
the case of γ traversing b twice. Let b1 [, b2 ] be the [two] lift[s] of b that lie along
τjX .γ; and let e1 [, e2 ] be the only favourable branch end[s] sharing a switch with b1 [,
b2 , respectively].
As seen in point 5 of Remark 2.2.9, αj+1 is the concatenation of train paths
X
+ 1), ρfj+1 where the first is an incoming ramp for τj+1
hitting Aγ , while

ρhj+1 , hsα (j

the last is an outgoing ramp avoiding Aγ and favourable. A similar decomposition
ρhj , hsα (j), ρfj for αj holds.
Using the conventions of Remark 2.4.12, τj+1 is obtained from τj unzipping a
single zipper, defined on an interval [−ε, t] for 1 < t < 2. This lifts to an infinite
family of zippers for τjX , and only one [two, resp.] of these intersects N̄ (τ X .γ): we
call it [them, resp.] κ1 [, κ2 according to which of b1 , b2 they traverse].

103

Note that, since unzipping κ1 [and κ2 ] does not realize a twist split, this [these two,

resp.] zipper[s] cannot intersect Aγ . Therefore ρhj = cτjX ρhj+1 i.e. the tie collapse
cannot create a segment lying along τjX .γ, and in particular xj = xj+1 . The only way
to have hlα (j + 1) < 2π < hlα (j), then, is that yj+1 < yj .


f
f
f
If ρj does not begin with e1 [nor with e2 ], then also ρj = cτjX ρj+1 . But this
would imply that αj , αj+1 have the same horizontal stretch, so hlα (j) = hlα (j + 1)
leading to a contradiction.
Thus, [without loss of generality] ρfj begins at e1 ; and this means that there is a
fake obstacle xj < wj < yj such that [wj , yj ]×{0} is one of the connected components
of qj−1 (b1 ); in particular no obstacles lie in (wj , yj ). In order to have the hypothesized
shortening in horizontal length, κ1 shall begin along the component of ∂v N̄ (τjX ) which
lies close to qj (yj , 0). Then the conventions of Remark 2.4.12 imply that yj+1 < wj
and, for all obstacles z < wj for τjX , yj+1 > z.
Note that the upper obstacle xj + 2π ∈ (xj , yj ) because hlα (j) > 2π. Necessarily,
then wj > xj + 2π and, from the above paragraph, also yj+1 > xj + 2π. This implies
hlα (j + 1) = yj+1 − xj > 2π, contrarily to our assumption.

Lemma 2.4.24 (Three ramps criterion). Let τ be a generic almost track splitting sequence such that a curve γ ∈ C(S) stays a twist curve in the subsequence
τ (k, l). Suppose the following:
• γ is not combed in τl ;
• τ (k, l) consists of subsequences which have been alternatively modelled according
to the conventions of Remark 2.4.12 — possibly including moves which consist
of trivial unzips — and of Remark 2.4.14 (the latter subsequences, of course,
must be of twist nature);
• under this fixed model, there is an incoming ramp ρhl : (−∞, 0] → τlX , hitting
Aγ , such that ρhk := cτkX ◦ ρhl also intersects τl .γ only in the point cτkX ◦ ρhl (0).
Then, if α ∈ C(τlX ) has a train path realization which includes ρhl then hlα (k) >
hlα (l) − 2π; in particular rotτ (γ; k, l) ≤ 1.
Proof. Given a subsequence τ (r, r0 ) of twist nature, and a model of it after the prescriptions given in Remark 2.4.14, the latter may easily be converted into a model
σ after Remark 2.4.12, except that some unzips may be trivial. In order to get this
alternative model, do not apply the isotopies that, after each unzip in τ (r, r0 ), make
sure that τj .γ stays unchanged; and keep trace of changes of τj .γ via the maps Ej
instead, as explained in Remark 2.4.12. This means, in particular, that rather than
having a single map q : R × [−2, 2] → S X , in the new model we have individual maps
104

qj for each entry in σ. Anyway, for each r ≤ j ≤ r0 one may find an index j 0 such
that q −1 (τj ) = qj−1
0 (σj 0 ) (the indices do not correspond exactly because the trivial
unzips appearing along τ (r, r0 ) have to be inserted as individual moves). Moreover,
if τ (r, r0 ) is replaced with σ, then the last bullet in the statement still holds.
So, ultimately, we can simplify the proof by supposing that the entire sequence
τ (k, l) is modelled after Remark 2.4.12, possibly with trivial moves.
Since γ is not combed in τl , τlX features two branch ends ef , ea which avoid Aγ
and are favourable and adverse, respectively. There are two outgoing ramps ρfl , ρal :
[0, +∞) → τlX which begin at ef , ea respectively.
Let ρ̃hl be a lift of ρhl to R × [−2, 2] via ql : xhl := ρ̃hl (0) is an upper obstacle for τlX .
The hypothesis on ρhk implies that it is an incoming ramp for τkX and, if one lifts it to
a ρ̃hk in R × [−2, 2] via qk , so that ρ̃hk , ρ̃hl depart from the same point of R × {−2, 2},
then the upper obstacle xhk := ρ̃hk (0) = xhl .
Let ρfk , ρak be outgoing ramps for τkX obtained from cτkX ◦ ρfl , cτkX ◦ ρal respectively
by trimming their initial subpaths lying along τkX .γ. Choose lifts ρ̃al , ρ̃fl of ρal , ρfl via
ql so that, if xal := ρ̃al (0), xfl := ρ̃fl (0), then xal < xfl < xal + 2π and xhl < xfl .
Let ρ̃ak , ρ̃fk be lifts of ρak , ρfk whose endpoints on R × {−2} are the same as ρ̃al , ρ̃fl
respectively. Let xak := ρ̃ak (0), xfk := ρ̃fk (0).
Then, by Remark 2.4.12, xak ≤ xal and xfk ≥ xfl . Also, note that the order of
xal , xfl , xal + 2π along R × {0} is the same as the order of the extremities of ρ̃al , ρ̃fl ,
ρ̃al + (2π, 0) along R × {−2}, which are also extremities of ρ̃ak , ρ̃fk , ρ̃ak + (2π, 0) (these
paths are all disjoint); therefore also xak , xfk , xak + 2π have the same order.
So, joining the inequalities, xfk < xak + 2π ≤ xal + 2π < xfl + 2π. Let α ∈ C(τlX )
be the arc defined by the train path α having, among its lifts to R × [−2, 2], the
concatenation of ρ̃hl , [xhl , xfl ] × {0}, ρ̃fl . In particular hlα (l) = xfl − xhl and, via a
similar realization in τkX , hlα (k) = xfk − xhk < xfl + 2π − xhl = hlα (l) + 2π.
This construction covers all α ∈ C(τlX ) whose realization includes ρhl : it suffices to
choose an appropriate ρfl at the beginning of this proof. In particular rotτ (γ; k, l) ≤ 1,
as claimed.


2.4.4

Twist split grouping

In our incoming estimates of distance in P+ (S) induced by a train track splitting
sequence, a big annoyance will be the potentially high number of twist splits that
do not result in an any accordingly large contribution to the pants distance, as it is
shown in Lemma 2.4.34. This is the reason why we shall work to identify exactly how
they alter the computation.
105

Proposition 2.4.25 (Split rearrangement for a twist curve). Suppose that τ =
(τj )N
j=0 is a generic train track splitting sequence on a surface S, such that a fixed curve
γ stays a twist curve, with one same twist collar Aγ and sign ε, throughout. Let X
be a regular neighbourhood of γ, and let m := rotτ (0, N ).
N (5)

Then there are another splitting sequence τ 0 = (τj0 )j=0 whose first and last entries
are the same as τ , and three indices 0 ≤ N (1) ≤ N (2) ≤ N (3) ≤ N (4) ≤ N (5), with
the following properties.
1. rotτ 0 (0, N (2)) ≤ 3; there is an increasing map f : [0, N ] → [0, N (2)] with
f (0) = 0, f (N ) = N (2) and such that, for all 0 ≤ j ≤ N , τj is obtained
from τf0 (j) with a splitting sequence of twist nature about γ followed by a comb
equivalence.
2. If 0 < N (1) < N (2) then γ is not combed in τ 0 (0, N (1) − 1) and it is in
τ 0 (N (1), N (2)); if these inequalities are not strict, instead, then γ is either
combed or not combed in the entire sequence τ 0 (0, N (2)).
3. τ 0 (N (2), N (3)) and τ 0 (N (4), N (5)) have twist nature about γ, while
τ 0 (N (3), N (4)) consists of slides only.
4. Let m0 := rotτ 0 (N (2), N (4)) Then m0 ≥ m − 5, while rotτ 0 (N (2), N (3)) = 0
0
and there is a factorization N (5) − N (4) = m0 k such that τk+j
= Dγε (τj0 ) for all

N (4) ≤ j ≤ N (5) − k.
A note of warning: the sequence τ 0 will be built with the possibility that some
entry is obtained from the previous one via isotopies only. It is clear, anyway, that
one may delete the repeated entries in the sequence (forgetting about any model
according to Remarks 2.4.12 and 2.4.14 that the sequence is given).
Proof. Step 1: replacement of τ with a splitting sequence with control on the number
of branches hitting Aγ .

Figure 2.11: A pull (above) and a push (below) as the result of an unzip.

We define two particular kinds of slide around γ: a push is a slide which increases
the number of branch ends hitting Aγ ; a pull is one which decreases said number
106

(see Figure 2.11). We also define a f-push and a f-pull accordingly, but replacing the
words ‘hitting Aγ ’ with ‘avoiding Aγ and favourable’.
In this step a new splitting sequence σ = (σj )M
j=0 will be constructed, with the
same beginning track as τ and with the elements of the sequence orderedly comb
equivalent to the ones of τ (in particular the last entries of the two sequences will be
comb equivalent), but with the property that no pulls occur; and that, if σ(M 0 , M ) is
the maximal subsequence of σ where γ is combed, then no f-pull occurs there, either.
Recall from the observation before Lemma 2.4.11 that, if γ is combed in a track along
a splitting sequence, than γ will remain combed in the sequence, as long as it is a
twist curve.
Let σ 0 be a wide splitting sequence obtained from τ via Proposition 2.2.21; and
let σ 0 be the conversion of it into another regular splitting sequence, by decomposing
each wide split into elementary moves.
We wish to define recursively a family of splitting sequences σ i whose entries keep
orderedly comb equivalent to the ones of τ : in particular there is an Aγ -family of
twist collars for all entries of all these sequences. We require that σ i is obtained from
adjoining σ i− ∗ σ i+ , where σ i− includes no pull, and no f-pull where γ is combed; and
i
σ i+ is the translation of a wide splitting sequence σ+
into a regular one — for i = 0,

σ 0− is empty while σ 0+ = σ 0 . The subsequence of σ i+ accounting for the j-th wide
i
will be called σ i+ (j).
split in σ+
Also, we require |σ i | to be the same for all i while |σ i+ | is strictly decreasing as i
increases: we stop the recursion when |σ i+ | = 0 (or earlier), so that σ i− is the sequence
σ that we desired to build.
s(i)
Suppose σ 0 , . . . , σ i have been defined; we proceed further to σ i+1 . Let (αji )j=0 be
i
. If in σ i+ there is
the sequence of the splitting arcs employed along the sequence σ+

no pull nor f-pull where γ is combed, then the recursion stops here with σ = σ i .
Else, the first pull in the sequence, or f-pull while γ is combed, occurs as part of a
σ i+ (j) such that the corresponding wide split in σ i+ is twist: far wide splits, indeed,
fail to produce a pull or a f-pull, and a spurious wide split can only produce a f-pull,
and only before γ gets combed. Denote t1 , t2 the indices such that σ i+ (j) = σ i (t1 , t2 );
but call ξ1 := σ it1 , ξ2 := σ it2 , for simplicity, the train tracks before and after this wide
twist split.
Orient the splitting arc αji , embedded in N̄ (ξ1 ), so that it traverses branches of γ
according to the Aγ -orientation.
S
S
Define B1 , B2 ⊆ B(ξ1 ) as the two collections of branches such that B1 , B2 give
the two connected components of ξ1 .αji \ ξ1 .γ — either, or both, may empty if the
107

specified set is connected or empty. Let R1 , R2 be the unions of the branch rectangles
i
i
= αji ∩ R2 . They are
= αji ∩ R1 , αj2
Rb for b ∈ B1 , b ∈ B2 respectively; and let αj1

the images of two disjoint small zippers (if either is empty, just ignore it): unzipping
i
i
ξ1 along αj1
and αj2
, one gets a sequence of slides, none of which is a pull or a fi
pull, turning ξ1 into ξ10 . In this latter almost track there is a splitting arc αj3
which

corresponds to αji (via Proposition 2.2.20), and it traverses only branches contained
in ξ10 .γ.
With a series of twist splits, rearrange the branch ends with their endpoints lying
i
along αj3
: move all the ones hitting Aγ past the ones that avoid it. The result, ξ20 , is
i
, that is ξ2 .
comb equivalent to the wide split along αj3
i
We define σ i+1
− by adjoining σ (0, t1 ) to the elementary moves seen above which
turn ξ1 into ξ10 and then ξ20 .
i+1
i
then σ+
can be considered to be a
If ξ2 is the last entry of the sequence σ+

trivial sequence with the entry ξ20 only, and the recursion ends here. If it is not then
i
ξ20 , being comb equivalent to ξ2 , carries a splitting arc which corresponds to αj+1
; by
i
in ξ2 , gives an
Proposition 2.2.20 the wide split of it, with the same parity as αj+1
i
which succeeds ξ2 .
almost track which is comb equivalent to the entry of σ+

Continuing this way one gets a wide splitting sequence σ i+1 whose entries are
i
comb equivalent to the entries of σ i from ξ2 on. As ξ2 is not the first entry of σ+
,
i+1
i
| > |σ+
|σ+
|. This concludes the description of the recursive construction.

Step 2: grouping together the moves which are not twist; definition of the subsequence
τ 0 (0, N (2)).
The argument used in this step is going to have some lines in common with the
one of Lemma 2.2.25 about central split postponement. The underlying idea is: scan
the sequence σ neglecting all twist moves, and performing all the other ones instead.
At a later stage, the twist moves forgotten here will be performed altogether to give
rise to the subsequence τ 0 (N (2), N (5)).
Consider the sequence of indices 0 = j0 ≤ j1 < . . . < j2r−1 ≤ j2r = M such that,
for all i such that the following expressions make sense, the sequence σ(j2i , j2i+1 )
has twist nature whereas no split or slide in σ(j2i+1 , j2i+2 ) is a twist one. We will
have j1 = 0 if and only if σ does not begin with a twist split or slide, and similarly
j2r−1 = M if and only if σ ends with a twist split or slide.
While the sequences σ(j2i+1 , j2i+2 ) will be modelled with the conventions explained
in Remark 2.4.12, the sequences of twist nature σ(j2i , j2i+1 ) will be realized with the
conventions of 2.4.14. In particular, along each sequence σ(j2i , j2i+1 ), the carrying
images σj .γ and the twist collar Aγ (j), for j2i ≤ j ≤ j2i+1 , are all the same subset
108

of S; and each of these sequences shall be regarded as one only affecting the picture
within Aγ (j), associated to a twist modelling function hi and, correspondingly, to a
bijection Hi : S → S.
Let qj : R × [−2, 2] → S X be the parametrization of S X which has been set up for
σj , in compliance of Remark 2.4.4 and of either Remark 2.4.12 or 2.4.14 as specified
above: it is handy to add to qj the request that all upper obstacles for σjX are points
of 2πQ × {0}; while all lower and fake obstacles are points of 2π(R \ Q) × {0}. With
this request one may as well suppose that all hi have hi (2πQ, 0) = 2πQ, and this will
be helpful when removing the twist moves, as we will see.
In accordance with what seen in Remark 2.2.18, for each index j ∈ [j2i+1 , j2i+2 −1]
for some i, if the elementary move performed on σj is not a central split, then it is
the result of unzipping a zipper κj . For ease of notation, if the move is a central
split, let κj be a splitting arc traversing the branch that is being split. In order to
comply with the further request on parametrizations specified above, necessarily the
following statement shall hold, for any j such that the j-th move is not a central
split and for any x ∈ R such that qj (x, 0) lies on the same tie as the last point of κj :
x ∈ 2π(R \ Q) if κj intersects Aγ (since twist moves have to be excluded, this means
that its unzip describes necessarily a push); while x ∈ 2πQ otherwise.
Define, for all i = 0, . . . r − 1, for all j2i+1 < j ≤ j2i+2 , E(j) := Ej2i+1 ◦ . . . ◦ Ej−1 :
(S, σj ) → (S, σj2i+1 ). Here the maps Ej are relative to the sequence σ, and defined as in
Remark 2.4.12. Set then, for notational convenience, E(j2i+1 ) = idS , and E[i] = E(j2i+2 ) .
Also, define F(j) := Fj−1 ◦ . . . ◦ F0 , which is defined on some subset of S which we
do not make explicit: for our purposes, it is important only that it includes the twist
collar Aγ (0). Note that there is a discrepancy between the definitions of F(j) and E(j) .
Now, for all j2i+1 ≤ j < j2i+2 , define φj : S → S by
−1
φj |Aγ (j) := F(j) ◦ H0−1 ◦ E[0] ◦ . . . ◦ Hi−1
◦ E[i−1] ◦ Hi−1 ◦ E(j)

and φj |S\Aγ (j) = idS\Aγ (j) .

This map is, in words: a bijection of S which fixes Aγ (j), is discontinuous only
along σj .γ, and ‘undoes’ the twist splits and slides performed in σ(0, j): while each
such move pushes the branch ends hitting Aγ forwards, this map moves them backwards by the same length. So define ρij := φj (σj ). We see that ρij is a generic
almost track, because we have kept upper obstacles in 2πQ and lower and fake ones
in 2π(R \ Q). Clearly, the existing parametrization qj can be used with respect to
(ρij )X , too, respecting the requests of Remark 2.4.4.
j

Let then ρi = (ρij )j2i+2
: this is a sequence resembling σ(j2i+1 , j2i+2 ) except that
2i+1
the effects of all the twist splits occurred earlier along σ have been cancelled. More
109

precisely, the twist modelling function
h∗i := hi (hi−1 (· · · h0 (x, t) · · · ))

(2.1)

induces a map Hi∗ such that Hi∗ (ρij ) = σj , for all j2i+1 ≤ j ≤ j2i+2 .
For each fixed j2i+1 ≤ j < j2i+2 , the zipper/splitting arc κj is still a zipper/multiple
branch for ρij and the unzip/central multiple split of it gives ρij+1 . But, in general,
if κj is a zipper, its unzip may possibly describe not a single elementary move, but
more than one; or even just an isotopy. Similarly, if κj is a splitting arc for σj , it may
be the case that κj is not a splitting arc in ρij . So, ρi in general is not a splitting
sequence, but each ρij+1 (j2i+1 ≤ j < j2i+2 ) is carried by the previous ρij . Also, note
0
r−1
that ρij2i+2 = ρi+1
) (which is not a
j2i+3 for all 0 ≤ i ≤ r − 2. Let ρ := (ρ ) ∗ · · · ∗ (ρ
splitting sequence either, but the concatenation makes sense).
Each unzip may be subdivided into several unzips along shorter zippers, each of
which give a single elementary move (or an isotopy). With this subdivision a splitting
sequence (ρi )0 is built, which touches orderedly all almost tracks in the sequence ρi
and respects the conventions of Remark 2.4.12. Patch together all these pieces to get
a new splitting sequence (possibly with trivial moves) ρ0 := (ρ0 )0 ∗ · · · ∗ (ρr−1 )0 . Note
that, if ξ is one of the almost tracks inserted between ρij and ρij+1 (for suitable i, j)
then Hi∗ (ξ) is isotopic to either σj or σj+1 ; which, in turn, is comb equivalent to τj 0
for a suitable j 0 .
Let (ρ0 )u be the maximal subsequence of ρ0 where γ is not combed, and let (ρ0 )c
the maximal subsequence where γ is combed. Either of these may be empty or trivial.
N (2)

Index ρ0 = (ρ0j )j=0 and let N (1) ∈ [1, N (2)] be an index such that:
• either (ρ0 )u is empty, or (ρ0 )u = ρ0 (0, N (1) − 1);
• either (ρ0 )c is empty, or (ρ0 )u = ρ0 (N (1), N (2)).
By construction, one has an increasing map fσ : [0, N ] → [0, M ] such that fσ (0) =
0, fσ (N ) = M and σfσ (j) comb equivalent to τj for all j. Also, for 0 ≤ j ≤ M , σj is
obtained from ρij (for the correct i) via a splitting sequence of twist nature, as seen.
This is enough to build the claimed map f : [0, N ] → [0, N (2)].
Step 3: estimation of rotρ0 (0, N (2)).
Let X be an annular neighbourhood of γ in S. We only cover the case 0 < N (1) <
N (2), as the other ones are simple adaptations.
h
0
X
We claim that there is an incoming, hitting ramp δN
such that
(2) in (ρN (2) )
h
0 X
c(ρ00 )X ◦ δN
(2) is an hitting ramp for (ρ0 ) .

110

Recall, first of all, that each zipper involved in each of the subsequences
σ(j2i+1 , j2i+2 ) induces a single elementary move; let σj , σj+1 be the almost tracks
before and after the move.
If the move is a push: all the upper obstacles for σjX are also upper obstacles for
−1
X
X
σj+1
. If δ : (−∞, 0] → σj+1
is a ramp hitting Aγ (j + 1), and qj+1
(δ(0)) is a collection

of upper obstacles for σjX , too, then cσjX ◦ δ is also a ramp hitting Aγ (j) — i.e. no
segment of cσjX ◦ δ lies along σjX .γ. This can be understood from Figure 2.11, even
though it is simplified.
The zipper κj unzipped in this move is the same employed to turn ρij into ρij+1 ;
and, despite the result of this unzip not being necessarily a single elementary move,
it is seen that the upper obstacles for (ρij )X are a subset of the ones for (ρij+1 )X and
that a similar property as above holds: i.e. if δ : (−∞, 0] → (ρij+1 )X is an incoming
−1
ramp hitting Aγ (j + 1), with qj+1
(δ(0)) a collection of upper obstacles for (ρij )X , then

c(ρij )X ◦ δ is a ramp for (ρij )X hitting Aγ (j).
If the elementary move from σj to σj+1 is not a push, recall that it is not a pull
or a twist move, either. The unzip that realizes it keeps qj−1 (σjX ) ∩ (R × [0, 1]) =
−1
−1
X
X
) ∩ (R × [0, 1]), and so also qj−1 (ρX
qj+1
(σj+1
j ) ∩ (R × [0, 1]) = qj+1 (ρj+1 ) ∩ (R × [0, 1]).

This implies that, for any incoming ramp δ : (−∞, 0] → (ρij+1 )X hitting Aγ (j + 1),
c(ρij )X ◦ δ is a ramp for (ρij )X hitting Aγ (j).
Considering that ρ0 only inserts intermediate stages between the entries

 of ρ, then,

h
−1
X
0
0
h
δN
with (qN
it is possible to pick δN
(2) (0) a
(2) )
(2) an incoming ramp for (ρN (2) )

subset of the upper obstacles of (ρ00 )X . The argument seen above yields that both
h
h
0
X
0 X
0
c(ρ0N (1) )X ◦ δN
(2) and c(ρ0 )X ◦ δN (2) are incoming ramps hitting Aγ in (ρN (1) ) , (ρ0 )
respectively.

So the sequence ρ0 (0, N (1) − 1), if nonempty, complies with the hypotheses of
Lemma 2.4.24; hence rotρ0 (γ; 0, N (1) − 1) ≤ 1.
As for the sequence (ρ0 )c , recall that no f-pulls occur here. So an argument
f
entirely similar to the above shows that there is an outgoing, favourable ramp δN
(2)
h
0
X
for ρ0N (2) with c(ρ0N (1) )X ◦ δN
(2) a favourable ramp for (ρN (1) ) . This means that,
f
h
if α ∈ V (ρ0N (2) ) has a train path realization which includes δN
(2) and δN (2) then

hl (ρ0N (1), α) = hl (ρ0N (2), α) i.e. α ∈ V (ρ0N (1) ). The move turning ρ0N (1)−1 into ρ0N (1)
makes γ into a combed curve, so it must be a spurious split: hence, by Lemma 2.4.23,
V (ρ0N (1) ) ⊆ V (ρ0N (1)−1 ). The presence of the element α both in the latter set and in
V (ρ0N (2) ) implies that rotρ0 (γ; N (1) − 1, N (2)) = 0.
By point 9 in Remark 2.4.20,
rotρ0 (N (1) − 1, N (2)) + 2 = 3.

rotρ0 (0, N (2))

111

≤

rotρ0 (0, N (1) − 1) +

Step 4: definition of the subsequence τ 0 (N (2), N (5)) and conclusion.
Let htot := h∗r−1 (see (2.1) above) and let Htot be the corresponding self-map of
S. Note that, by construction, σM = Htot (ρ0N 0 ). Applying Lemma 2.4.15 to the twist
modelling function htot is therefore possible to build a splitting sequence ω, having
twist nature about γ, beginning with ρ0N (2) and ending with σM . Let m0 be the
rotation number of the sequence ω.
As a consequence of Lemma 2.4.21, ω can be replaced by a new sequence ω 0 =
0
0
0
(ωj0 )Q
j=0 of twist nature, with ω0 = ρN (2) , ωQ comb equivalent to σM (and to τN ) such
0
ε
0
that, for suitable integers Q0 , k 0 we have Q = Q0 + k 0 m0 and ωj+k
0 = Dγ (ωj ) for all

Q0 ≤ j ≤ Q − k 0 ; while rotω0 (γ; 0, Q0 ) = 0.
0

0
Let ξ be a series of slides that turns ωQ
into τN ; so the sequence Dγ−εm · ξ (i.e.
0
0
−εm0
the application of Dγ−εm to all elements in the sequence ξ) turns ωQ
(τN ).
0 into Dγ
0

k
Lemma 2.4.15 gives a new splitting sequence ω 00 = (ωj00 )m
j=0 , with twist nature about
0

00
γ, with ωj+k
= Dγε (ωj00 ) for all 0 ≤ j ≤ m0 (k − 1), and such that ω000 = Dγ−εm (τN ) and
00
ωm
0 k = τN .
0

Define finally τ 0 = ρ0 ∗ ω 0 (0, Q0 ) ∗ (Dγ−εm · ξ) ∗ ω 00 . This splitting sequence satisfies
all requirements in the statement with N (3) = N (2) + Q0 and N (4) = N (3) +
(length of ξ)−1. In particular, due to point 9 in Remark 2.4.20, m0 ≥ rotτ 0 (0, N (5))−
rotτ 0 (0, N (2)) − 2 ≥ m − 5.



Remark 2.4.26. The rearrangement procedure has a good behaviour with respect to
the following properties — meaning that if all tracks in τ have the specified property
then all tracks in τ 0 have the same property, too.
• Recurrence and transverse recurrence. In Remark 2.1.25 we have noted that all
train tracks in a splitting sequence are recurrent if the last track in the sequence
is. Moreover, they are all transversely recurrent if the first track in the sequence
is. And τ , τ 0 have the same endpoints.
• Being cornered. For each train track τj0 there is a train track τi with a natural
correspondence between the components of S \ N (τj0 ) and the ones of S \ N (τi ),
under which they are pairwise diffeomorphic.
Remark 2.4.27. We report a property of twist curves noted in [Mos03], p. 215:
Let Γ ⊆ C0 (S) be a family of essential curves which are pairwise disjoint up to
isotopies, and are all twist curves for a given almost track τ . Then, even if the
carried images of these curves are not necessarily pairwise disjoint, it is possible to
take a family of pairwise disjoint twist collars Aγ , for all γ ∈ Γ. For each of the
112

γ ∈ Γ which are combed in τ , one may also choose what side of γ the collar Aγ must
lie.
Lemma 2.4.28 (Small interference of twist curves). Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic splitting sequence of almost tracks such that a curve γ ∈ C0 (S) remains a
twist curve throughout a subsequence τ (k, l). If either of the following is true, then
rotτ (γ; k, l) = 0.
• There is a curve γ1 , intersecting γ essentially, that also remains a twist curve
throughout τ (k, l).
• There is a family of curves γ1 , . . . , γm , all disjoint up to isotopy from γ (not
necessarily from each other), such that τ (k, l) consists of subsequences of twist
nature, each with respect to one of the curves γj .
Proof. Let X be a regular neighbourhood of γ in S.
In the first scenario: we claim that, for all k ≤ j ≤ l, πX (γ1 ) ⊆ C(τjX ) is actually
a subset of V (τjX ). Note, first of all, that it is surely it is not empty.
If the claim is false, one of the branches in τjX .γ is traversed twice, in the same
direction, by an arc in the family πX (γ1 ); and, if this is true, then also γ1 traverses
twice and in the same direction one of the branches in τj .γ. But this would contradict
the fact that, as a twist curve, γ1 ∈ W (τj ).
This means that V (τkX ) ∩ V (τlX ) ⊇ πX (γ1 ) 6= ∅. By point 6 in Remark 2.4.20,
this implies that rotτ (γ, k, l) = 0.
In the second scenario, call τ (ki , li ) the subsequence of τ (k, l) which has twist
nature with respect to γi ; and model it according to Remark 2.4.14, applied to the
twist curve γi . As the curves γi are all disjoint from γ, the j-th elementary move in
τ (k, l) changes τk+j−1 only within the relevant Aγi (j − 1) = Aγi (j), thus it does not
affect Aγ (j) nor τk+j .γ, because of the disjointness property (Remark 2.4.27 above).
X
In other words, for ki ≤ j < li , cτjX |τj+1
is the identity map out of Aγi . This means

that we can employ the same parametrization q : R × [−2, 2] → S X , in compliance
with Remark 2.4.4, and focused on the twist curve γ, for all almost tracks in the
sequence τ (k, l).
There are now two sub-cases to be considered. If none of the γi traverses one
same branch of the corresponding τki as γ, then all splits in the sequence τ (k, l) are
far from γ and so V (τlX ) ⊆ V (τkX ) by Lemma 2.4.23. So rotτ (γ, k, l) = 0 because the
two vertex sets are not disjoint (point 6 in Remark 2.4.20).
Now suppose that at least one of the curves γi traverses a branch of τki .γ. Then
in τkXi there is necessarily an Aγ -adverse branch, also traversed by γi ; and thus, there
113

is one also in τkX . Let then B ⊆ τkX .γ be a union of consecutive branches whose
extremities are both small branch ends, whose endpoints are switches incident to a
Aγ -favourable and an Aγ -adverse branch end, respectively, and such that all switches
in int(B) are incident to branch ends hitting Aγ . Then, if a twist curve δ for τk has
no essential intersection with γ, then no lift of it to S X traverses any branch in B;
nor any lift of a twist collar Aδ ⊆ S to S X may intersect B.
This implies, by recursion, that B remains delimited by a pair of branch ends
which are favourable and adverse, respectively, after each elementary move in the
sequence τ (k, l). Let f be the favourable one of these two branch ends: by what has
been said so far, cτjX (f ) = f for all k ≤ j ≤ l.
Pick any α ∈ V (τlX ) which traverses f . Due to the decomposition specified in
point 5 of Remark 2.2.9, a train path realization αl of α will include an incoming,
favourable ramp ρfl ending with f , followed by an embedded stretch hs(τl , α) along
τlX .γ, and finally an outgoing ramp ρhl hitting Aγ , and starting at a branch end e.
The arc α also belongs to C(τkX ). A train path realization of α in τkX is cτkX ◦ αl
(possibly with a reparametrization). Note that both cτkX ◦ ρfl , cτkX ◦ ρhl are ramps in
τkX because cτkX is the identity on both f, e.
Therefore also hs(τk , α) = hs(τl , α), hence α ∈ V (τkX ) and rot(γ; k, l) = 0.



Now we are going to use some machinery that was already set up in [MMS12],
so our hypotheses on the considered train track splitting sequences become more
restrictive. Also, we will use shorthand notations like τ (I) := τ (min I, max I), where
I is an interval in Z and τ is a splitting sequence indexed by a superinterval of I.
Definition 2.4.29. A train track splitting sequence τ = (τj )N
j=0 on a surface S
evolves firmly in a possibly disconnected subsurface S 0 of S if, for each 0 ≤ j ≤ N ,
V (τj ) fills exactly the subsurface S 0 .
Definition 2.4.30. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic train track splitting sequence on S,
0
evolving firmly in a subsurface S , not necessarily connected.
A curve γ ∈ C(S), and essential in one of the non-annular connected components
of S 0 , is an effective twist curve for τ if
dN (γ) (τ0 , τN ) ≥ 4K0 + 19,
where N (γ) is a regular neighbourhood of γ in S, and K0 is the constant defined in
Theorem 2.3.2.

114

Note that the given definition does not require that πN (γ) (V (τ0 )) , πN (γ) (V (τN )) 6=
∅, because this is automatic by the request that all vertex cycles fill the same S 0 .
Also, note that for an effective twist curve γ in a splitting sequence τ necessarily Iγ 6= ∅, by the first point of Theorem 2.3.2; in other words, an effective twist
curve is, in particular, a twist curve for some tracks in the sequence τ . Moreover,
dN (γ) (τmin Iγ , τmax Iγ ) ≥ 2K0 + 19.
Definition 2.4.31. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic splitting sequence of cornered birecurrent train tracks on a surface S, evolving firmly in some subsurface S 0 , not
necessarily connected. Let γ1 , . . . , γr ∈ C(τ0 ), and for each 1 ≤ t ≤ r let It be the
accessible interval of Nt := N (γt ) a regular neighbourhood of γt .
We say that the splitting sequence τ is (γ1 , . . . , γr )-arranged if the following conditions hold. For each t = 1, . . . , r, there is a Dehn interval for γt : a subinterval DIt ⊂ It
such that τ (DIt ) has twist nature with respect to γt with rotτ (γt ; DIt ) ≥ 2K0 + 4,
and is arranged into Dehn twists as prescribed in Lemma 2.4.21, with no remainder.
Given any two intervals DIt , for distinct values of t, they may intersect in at most
one point; the curves are listed with the condition that the sequence (max DIs )rs=1 is
increasing. Also, let Gt− := [0, min It ]; Gt+ := [max It , N ]; It− := [min It , min DIt ];
It+ := [max DIt , max It ].
As an additional piece of notation, we subdivide each interval DIt into subintervals
DIt (0), . . . , DIt (mt − 1), where mt = rotτ (γt ; DIt ), dividing Dehn twists from one
another. More precisely the maximum of each subinterval is also the minimum of
the following one; if we call at (i) = min DIt (i) for i = 0, . . . , mt − 1 and at (mt ) =
max DIt (mt −1), then the sequence at (0), . . . , at (mt ) is an arithmetic progression and,

for each i, j such that at (0) ≤ at (i) + j ≤ at (mt ), we have τat (i)+j = Dγεit τat (0)+j .
Let now γ1 , . . . , γr ∈ C(τ0 ) be the effective twist curves of τ . We say that τ
is effectively arranged if it is (γ1 , . . . , γr )-arranged and the following holds. For each
1 ≤ t ≤ r, if i, j ∈ Gt− ∪ It− , then dNt (τi , τj ) ≤ K0 + 2R0 + 9; while, if i, j ∈ It+ ∪ Gt+ ,
then dNt (τi , τj ) ≤ K0 + 6 — and if i, j ∈ It+ then dNt (τi , τj ) ≤ 6.
Here K0 is as in Definition 2.4.30, and R0 = R0 (S, Q) is as defined in Lemma 1.2.7,
where Q is the quasi-isometry constant introduced in Theorem 2.3.5.
Proposition 2.4.32 (Effective rearrangement). Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic
splitting sequence of cornered birecurrent train tracks, which evolves firmly in some
(possibly disconnected) subsurface S 0 of a surface S. Let γ1 , . . . , γr ∈ C(τ0 ) be the
effective twist curves of τ , listed so that the sequence (max Iγs )rs=1 is increasing.

115

0

Then there is a (γ1 , . . . , γr )-effectively arranged splitting sequence Rτ = (Rτj )N
j=0
which begins and ends with the same train tracks as τ . The two splitting sequences,
in particular, have the same family of effective twist curves. Moreover, if IsR is the
accessible interval of γs in Rτ , then the sequence (max IsR )m
s=1 is also increasing.
Proof. We will define recursively (decreasing the indices) a sequence of splitting sequences τ = τ r+1 , τ r , . . . , τ 1 = Rτ on the surface S — each of those will be indexed
s

as τ s = (τjs )N
j=0 — with the following properties. Their entries will all be cornered birecurrent train tracks; the first and last entries in each of these sequences will always
be the same as in τ ; each τ s , informally speaking, is ‘partially’ effectively arranged:
it satisfies the requests in the definition of effectively arranged only for the curves γt
with t ≥ s.
More precisely: for all 1 ≤ t ≤ r, denote Its the accessible interval relative to
the curve γt in the splitting sequence τ s ; and Gst− := [0, min Its ]; Gst+ := [max Its , N s ].
For the indices s ≤ t ≤ r an interval DIts ⊆ Its will be provided, together with
s :=
s :=
[max DIts , max Its ]. The following claim will be true
It−
[min Its , min DIts ]; It+
for each s = r + 1, r, . . . , 1:
In the splitting sequence τ s , for all s ≤ t ≤ r:
s
s
) ≤ 2;
∪ Gst+ =⇒ dNt (τis , τjs ) ≤ K0 + 6; and rotτ s (γt ; It+
1. i, j ∈ It+
s
s
s
s
s
2. dNt (τ0s , τmin
DIts ) ≤ K0 + 9, and i, j ∈ Gt− ∪ It− =⇒ dNt (τi , τj ) ≤ K0 + 2R0 + 9;
3. DIts is a Dehn interval for γt : τ s (DIts ) is a sequence of twist nature with

respect to γt , with rotτ s (γt ; DIts ) ≥ 2K0 + 4, arranged in Dehn twists with no
remainder.
Eventually, it will suffice to define Rτ := τ 1 .
Step 1: recursive construction of the sequences τ s .
Fix 1 ≤ s ≤ r. Suppose that all τ i for i ≥ s + 1 have been defined, together with
i
i
intervals DIti , It−
, It+
⊆ Iti for t in the range i, . . . , r. For each fixed i, the intervals

DIti are pairwise disjoint except possibly for a common endpoint.
We now build τ s from τ s+1 with an application of Proposition 2.4.25, with respect
s+1
to γs , on a suitable subsequence of τ s+1 . We define Is+
as follows: the idea is that
s+1
Is+
is an interval we do not want to apply Proposition 2.4.25 on, because it is already

structured in twists with respect to other curves.
• If max Iss+1 is contained in DIts+1 for a t ≥ s + 1, let J be the maximal concatenation of intervals DIus+1 , r ≥ u ≥ s + 1, such that the maximum of one is the
s+1
= Iss+1 ∩ J.
minimum of another, and DIts+1 is part of the union. Let then Is+

116

s+1
:= {max Iss+1 }.
• If max Iss+1 is not contained in any DIts+1 , define Is+
s+1
). Let σ 0 be the splitting sequence obtained
Set now σ := τ s+1 (min Iss+1 , min Is+
0
from σ by application of Proposition 2.4.25; and define τ s := τ s+1 (Gs+1
s− ) ∗ σ ∗
s+1
s
s
τ s+1 (Is+
∪ Gs+1
s+ ). As entries in τ are given indices in the interval [0, N ], the three

sequences which compose it are indexed by subintervals which we call [0, as ], [as , bs ],
s+1
[bs , N s ], respectively. With this indexing, the subsequence τ s+1 (Is+
) is copied to a
s
s
= bs .
; and it has min Is+
subsequence of τ s indexed by an interval which we call Is+
Note that, as a consequence of the construction, the sequence (max Its )rt=1 is in-

creasing. Given an index 1 ≤ i ≤ r + 1, let P (i) be the following property: “for all
i ≤ t ≤ r, max DIti coincides with either min DIui for an index u ≥ t, or with max Iti ;
and the sequences (min DIti )rt=i , (max DIti )rt=i are increasing”.
We prove the following:
i
If P (i) is true for a given i > 1, then DIti ⊆ I(i−1)+
∪ Gi(i−1)+ for all i ≤ t ≤ r.
i
Proof. There are two cases to consider: if max DIii = max Iii , which is ≥ max Ii−1
,
i
i
∪ Gi(i−1)+ ; and for i ≤ t ≤ r,
, DIii ⊆ I(i−1)+
then clearly, by construction of I(i−1)+
i
∪ Gi(i−1)+ is true because of the last sentence in P (i).
DIti ⊆ I(i−1)+

If max DIii = min DIui for some u ≥ i then, by the monotonicity of (min DIti )rt=i ,
necessarily u = i + 1. Let then J 0 be the maximal interval which contains DIii
and is obtained as a union of intervals DIti , i ≤ t ≤ r. Let i ≤ t0 ≤ r be the
index such that max J 0 = max DIti0 . Suppose for a contradiction that there exists an
i
index i ≤ t00 ≤ r with DIti00 6⊆ I(i−1)+
∪ Gi(i−1)+ ; then, again by monotonicity, also
i
DIii 6⊆ I(i−1)+
∪ Gi(i−1)+ .
i
has been defined in the sequence τ i , in order for this
Considering the way I(i−1)+
i
> max J 0 . But in this case, also max Iti0 > max J 0
to happen it must be max Ii−1

for all i ≤ t ≤ r, and in particular max Iti0 > max DIti0 . However, by definition of
J 0 and t0 , there is no index u such that max DIti0 = min DIui . So the index t0 is a
contradiction to P (i).

Now, P (r + 1) is voidly true; we assume P (s + 1), and further ahead we prove
that P (s) follows: this is necessary to legitimate the recursive construction of τ s .
s+1
As said above, DIts+1 ⊆ Is+
∪ Gs+1
s+ for all s + 1 ≤ t ≤ r. So the construction of
s+1
τ s causes the subsequences τ s+1 (It+
) and τ s+1 (DIts+1 ) to be copied to subsequences
s
inside τ s (bs , N s ). They will be indexed by intervals which we call It+
, DIts respectively.

In σ 0 , following the notation given in Proposition 2.4.25, there is a subsequence
indexed by the subinterval [N (4), N (5)], and we call it σ 00 : σ 00 has twist nature with
117

respect to γs and is arranged into Dehn twists with no remainder. When inserting σ 0
as the subsequence τ s (as , bs ) of τ s , σ 00 will be given indices in a subinterval of [as , bs ]:
s :=
[min Its , min DIts ].
we call it DIss . Define, for t ≥ s, It−
With these definitions, P (s) is ‘almost true’: it is true that “for all s + 1 ≤ t ≤ r,
max DIts coincides with either min DIus for an index u ≥ t, or with max Its ; and
the sequences (min DIts )rt=s+1 , (max DIts )rt=s+1 are increasing”. This is because, since
s+1
all the relevant intervals DIts+1 (s + 1 ≤ t ≤ r) are contained in Is+
∪ Gs+1
s+ , the

corresponding DIts are contained in [bs , N s ], and this family of subintervals is just a
translation of the corresponding family DIts+1 in [0, N s+1 ].
But the construction forces max DIss to be a lower bound for all intervals DIts ,
s + 1 ≤ t ≤ r; and we have max DIss = max Iss if Iss is disjoint from all DIts , t > s,
while max DIss = mint>s (min DIts ) otherwise. So P (s) is true.
Step 2: the properties claimed above for τ s hold.
Those properties are empty for s = r + 1. Supposing that they hold for τ r+1 , . . . ,
τ s+1 , we prove that they hold for τ s , establishing an inductive argument.

Note, first of all, that if t ≥ s then i, j ∈ Gst− ⇒ dNt τis , τjs ≤ K0 by point 1 of


s
s
,
τ
≥ dNt (τ0s , τNs s )−2K0 =
Theorem 2.3.2. Same for i, j ∈ Gst+ . Hence dNt τmin
s
s
max It
It
2K0 + 19; and rotτ s (γt ; Its ) ≥ 2K0 + 15, by point 9 in Remark 2.4.20.
s+1
s+1
Properties 1 and 3 for t > s: since DIts+1 , It+
⊆ Is+
∪ Gs+1
s+ , we have that
s+1
s
) are copies of τ s+1 (DIts+1 ), τ s+1 (It+
), respectively. Hence, by inτ s (DIts ), τ s (It+
s
s
ductive hypothesis,
they have

 rotτ s (γt ; DIt ) ≥ 2K0 + 4; and rotτ s (γt , It+ ) ≤ 2 which
s
s
yields dNt τmin
≤ 6 via point 7 of Remark 2.4.20.
s , τmax I s
It+
t+
s+1
s
Property 1 for t = s: we claim that rotτ s+1 (γs ; Is+
) ≤ 2,
) ≤ 2 — and rotτ s (γs ; Is+

because the two rotation numbers
 are computed on two copies of the same sequence
s
s
≤ 6.
— therefore dNs τmin
s , τmax I s
Is+
s+
s+1
The claim is obvious if Is+
= {max Iss+1 }. If max Iss+1 ∈ DIts for a fixed t > s, call
s+1
s+1
A = Is+
∩ DIts ; B = [min Is+
, min A]. Then rotτ s+1 (γs ; A) = 0 because of Lemma

2.4.28 (both in case γs , γt intersect and in case they do not). According to the same
lemma, when B is not a single point, necessarily all curves γu with DIus+1 ⊆ B must
be essentially disjoint from γs , because rotτ s+1 (γu ; DIus+1 ) ≥ 2K0 + 4. But then the
sequence τ s (B) falls into the case covered in the second point of Lemma 2.4.28, which
s+1
) ≤ 2 by point 9 in Remark 2.4.20.
yields rotτ s+1 (γs ; B) = 0. So rotτ s+1 (γs , Is+
s+1
s+1
Property 2 for t > s: again because max It−
= min DIts+1 ∈ Is+
∪ Gs+1
s+ , the
s+1
s
sequence τ s (Gst− ∪ It−
) begins and ends with the same train tracks as τ s (Gs+1
t− ∪ It− ).
s
So dNt (τ0s , τmin
DIts ) ≤ K0 + 9 by inductive hypothesis. According to Theorem 2.3.5

118


the sequence πNt (V (τjs )) j∈Gs

s
t− ∪It−

is a Q-unparametrized quasi-geodesic in C(Nt ), so

s
, dNt (τis , τjs ) ≤
the reverse triangle inequality in Lemma 1.2.7 gives, for i, j ∈ Gst− ∪ It−

K0 + 2R0 + 9 as required.
s
Property 2 for t = s: Proposition 2.4.25 above guarantees that rotτ s (γs , Is−
) ≤ 5,
s
as τ s (Is−
) indeed corresponds, using the notation given in that Proposition, to the
s
, we
subsequence τ 0 (0, N (4)) of the output sequence τ 0 . So, for all pairs i, j ∈ Is−

have dNs (τis , τjs ) ≤ 9 (see point 7 in Remark 2.4.20). Combine it with the previously
noted bounds for i, j ∈ Gss− to complete the proof that property 2 holds.
Property 3 for t = s: by point 9 in Remark 2.4.20, rotτ s (γs ; DIss ) ≥ rotτ s (γs ; Iss ) −
s
s
) − 4 ≥ 2K0 + 4.
) − rotτ s (γs ; Is+
rotτ s (γs ; Is−

2.4.5



A bound on the number of highly twisting curves

Note: In this subsection we still deal mostly with generic almost tracks. However,
we make use of the diagonal extension machinery from §2.2.4; so we have to consider
some semigeneric almost tracks as well. The adjective ‘generic’ will be made explicit
when appropriate, anyway.
Given a surface S, recall that in Remark 2.1.26 we have fixed the parameters k, `
involved in the definition of P+ (S) and of P+ (X 0 ) for X 0 a subsurface of S. Let
M := maxX 0 ⊆S M6 (X 0 , k(X 0 , S), `(X 0 )), where the maximum is taken over all X 0 ⊆ S
non-annular subsurfaces, and M6 (X 0 , k, `) is defined as in Lemma 1.2.12.
Given a non-annular subsurface X 0 and two train tracks σ, τ on S, suppose that
πY (V (σ)) , πY (V (τ )) 6= ∅ for all Y ⊆ X 0 non-annular subsurfaces. In this case define
X
d0P+ (X 0 ) (σ, τ ) :=
[dY (σ, τ )]M .
Y ⊂X 0 essential
and non-annular

And, if non-emptyness holds also for all projections onto annuli Y ⊆ X 0 , we may
also define
X

d0M+ (X 0 ) (σ, τ ) :=
Y

⊂X 0

[dY (σ, τ )]M .

essential

Similarly as in Theorem 1.2.9, the summations shall be meant over Y ⊂ X 0
subsurfaces, counting only one representative for each isotopy class in S. Restating
that theorem, also in the light of Lemma 1.2.12 one has
d0P+ (X 0 ) (σ, τ ) =(e0 ,e1 ) dP+ (X 0 ) (πX 0 V (σ), πX 0 V (τ ));
d0M+ (X 0 ) (σ, τ ) =(e0 ,e1 ) dM+ (X 0 ) (πX 0 V (σ), πX 0 V (τ )).
in the two respective cases, for suitable constants e0 (X 0 , M, k, `), e1 (X 0 , M, k, `).
119

Suppose now that V (σ|X 0 ) and V (τ |X 0 ) are vertices of P+ (X 0 ) (resp. M+ (X)).
Then πX 0 V (σ) and πX 0 V (τ ) are vertices there, too, i.e. the above formulas make
sense for them. This implies, via Lemma 2.2.13, that
d0P+ (X 0 ) (σ, τ ) =(e0 ,e1 +C1 ) dP+ (X 0 ) (σ, τ ) ;
d0M+ (X 0 ) (σ, τ ) =(e0 ,e1 +C1 ) dM+ (X 0 ) (σ, τ ) .
The aim of this subsection is to prove the following
Proposition 2.4.33. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic, recurrent train track splitting
sequence on a surface S which evolves firmly in some subsurface S 0 — not necessarily
a connected one. Let X be (another) non-annular subsurface of S; let γ1 , . . . , γq ⊆
C(τ0 ) be curves all contained, and essential, in X; and suppose that τ is (γ1 , . . . , γq )arranged (see Definition 2.4.31; in particular the sequence (max DIt )qt=1 is increasing).
Fix 0 ≤ k ≤ l ≤ N with V (τl |X) ∈ P+ 0 (X) and such that DIt ⊆ [k, l] for all
1 ≤ t ≤ q.
Then there are constants C3 , C4 , only depending on S, such that
q ≤ C3 d0P+ (X) (τk , τl ) + C4 .
Before we start, anyway, we prove a lemma which will be of use in the following
sections, too.
Lemma 2.4.34. Let S be a surface, X be a non-annular subsurface of S (possibly
X = S), γ ∈ C(X).
Let τ be a generic almost track and τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic splitting sequence of
almost tracks on S, with τ (k, l) a sequence of twist nature about γ.
1. (Dγ (τ )) |X and Dγ (τ |X) are isotopic (here Dγ : X → X, so it can be extended
trivially to both S and S X , where the almost tracks lie).
2. If V (τk |X) is a vertex of P+ (X) (resp. of M+ (X)), then V (τj |X) is one, too,
for all k ≤ j ≤ l.
3. In the sequence (τj |X)lj=k , each entry is fully carried by the previous one.
4. There is a bound C2 (S) such that, if V (τk |X) is a vertex of P+ (X), then
dP+ (X) (τk |X, τl |X) ≤ C2 , and dY (τk |X, τl |X) ≤ C2 for all Y ⊆ X non-annular
subsurfaces.
Proof. To prove claim 1, note that the map Dγ : S → S has a lift D̂ : S X → S X whose
restriction to core(X) = X ∩ core(S X ) concides with the restriction of Dγ : X → X.

120

Therefore D̂ : S X → S X is isotopic to Dγ : S X → S X . The claim follows from
D̂(τ |X) = (Dγ (τ )) |Dγ (X) = (Dγ (τ )) |X.
For claims 2 and 3, model τ (k, l) according to Remark 2.4.14. If h is a twist
modelling function associated with τ (k, l), then by point 10 in Remark 2.4.20, one
may assume h(x, 0) < x + 2π (rot(k, l) + 3) for all x ∈ R which means that there is
a twist modelling function h0 such that h0 (h(x, 0), 0) = x + 2π(rot(k, l) + 3). This is
associated with a splitting sequence of twist nature, which we call σ, turning τl into
ε(rot(k,l)+3)
Dγ
(τk ), where
 ε is the sign of γ as a twist curve.
ε(rot(k,l)+3)

It is clear that V Dγ

ε(rot(k,l)+3)

(τk |X) = Dγ

· V (τk |X): here, Dγ shall be

X
X
meant
 as the Dehn twist
 about γ as a diffeomorphism S → S or X → X. So
ε(rot(k,l)+3)
V Dγ
(τk |X) is a vertex of P+ (S) (resp. of M+ (X)) if and only if V (τk |X)
is one, too; but the remark following Lemma 2.2.11, applied to σ, yields that in this

case V (τl |X) is also a vertex of P+ (X) (resp. M+ (X)). Moreover in the sequence
τ ∗ σ, induced on X, each entry carries the following one, and the first one τk |X
ε(rot(k,l)+3)

fully carries the last one Dγ
(τk |X). So the carrying must be a full one at any
intermediate stage of the sequence.
00

For claim 4: define, from τ (k, l), a splitting sequence τ 0 = (τj0 )N
j=0 arranged in
Dehn twists plus remainder, as in Lemma 2.4.21. We adopt the notation used in the
statement of that lemma. In particular, V (τ00 ) = V (τk ) and Dγεm · V (τN0 0 ) = V (τN0 00 ) =
V (τl ). Since rotτ 0 (γ; 0, N 0 ) = 0, at most 3N32 splits occur in τ 0 (0, N 0 ) by Lemma
2.4.22.
But, once the surface S is fixed, the possible pairs (τ0 , γ) as in the statement are
finitely many up to the action of Mod(S) (cfr. Lemma 2.1.18). The finiteness of
possible choices implies that there is a bound k1 , depending on S only, on i(α, β), for
α ∈ V (τ00 ), β ∈ V (τN0 0 ).
Let p(τN 0 ) be a pants decomposition of S including the curve γ, chosen so that
maxα∈p(τN 0 ),β∈V (τN 0 ) i(α, β) is minimal among all pants decompositions with this property. So, again by finiteness of possible configurations up to Mod(S), a constant k2 =
k2 (S) exists with maxα∈p(τN 0 ),β∈V (τN 0 ) i(α, β) ≤ k2 . Using the fact that Dγεm · p(τN 0 ) =
p(τN 0 ) and Dγεm · V (τN0 0 ) = V (τN0 00 ), also maxα∈p(τN 0 ),β∈V (τN 00 ) i(α, β) ≤ k2 .
We now use arguments similar to the ones in Lemma 2.2.13. For each Y ⊆ X
non-annular subsurface, πY V (τ00 ), πY V (τN0 0 ), πY (p(τN0 0 )) , πY V (τN0 0 ) are all non-empty.
Using Remark 1.2.5, given α ∈ πY V (τ00 ), β ∈ πY V (τN0 0 ) one has i(α, β) ≤ 4k1 + 4,
and a similar bound 4k2 + 4 holds for i(α, β) if α ∈ πY (p(τN0 0 )) and β ∈ πY V (τN0 0 ) or
∈ πY V (τN0 00 ).

121

Appealing to Lemma 1.2.4,
dY (V (τ00 ), V (τN0 00 )) ≤ F (4k1 + 4) + 2F (4k2 + 4).
This implies also that dY (τ00 |X, τN0 00 |X) is bounded, by the first statement in Lemma
2.2.13.
Let M > max{M6 (S), F (4k1 + 4) + 2F (4k2 + 4)}. Then, by Theorem 1.2.9 and
Lemma 1.2.12 applied with the specified value M ,
dP+ (X) (πX V (τ00 ), πX V (τN0 00 )) ≤ e1 (X, M, k(X, S), `(X)).
Lemma 2.2.13, finally, gives our claim.



Rather than proving Proposition 2.4.33 directly in the form given, we will lean on
the following definition and lemma.5
Definition 2.4.35. Given a surface S and a sequence α1 , . . . , αr of distinct isotopy
classes of essential simple closed curves on S, we call an increasing subsequence
αj1 , . . . , αjs a chain if, for all 1 ≤ i < s, αji+1 intersects αji essentially.
Lemma 2.4.36. Let S be a surface and let α1 , . . . , αr be a sequence of distinct isotopy
classes of essential simple closed curves on S. Suppose that any chain in this sequence
has at most c elements: then r ≤ ξ(S)c.
Proof. We define a partition A1 , . . . , At of {1, . . . , r} inductively, as follows — the
number t ≥ 1 will be determined by the construction. First, assign 1 ∈ A1 .
Suppose now that all indices 1, . . . , i (i < r) have been assigned to some set in the
partition. Let then i + 1 ∈ Au+1 , where u is the highest of all v ≥ 0 such that, for
each 1 ≤ v 0 ≤ v, there exists j ∈ Av0 , j ≤ i, such that αi+1 intersects αj essentially.
In particular, if αi+1 is disjoint from all curves αj with j ≤ i and j ∈ A1 , then we
assign i + 1 ∈ A1 , too. Eventually, we define t to be the highest index u such that
some 1 ≤ i ≤ r has been assigned to Au .
As a consequence of the construction, if j ∈ Au for u > 1 then there exists an
index 1 ≤ l(j) < j such that l(j) ∈ Au−1 . Moreover, all indices in a specified set Au of
the partition correspond to pairwise disjoint curves: as such, they are part of a pants
decomposition for S, so there are at most ξ(S) indices in Au . Therefore t ≥ r/ξ(S).
Let now j ∈ At . The indices l(t−1) (j), l(t−2) (j), . . . , l(j), j belong to A1 , A2 , . . . ,
At−1 , At respectively (here l(i) denotes the iteration of l for i times), and the subsequence of α1 , . . . , αr specified by those indices is a chain. Therefore t ≤ c; and
r ≤ ξ(S)c as claimed.

5

Many thanks to Saul Schleimer for having suggested the proof of this lemma.

122

As our argument to prove Proposition 2.4.33 is based on the diagonal extension
machinery, we wish to make sure that diagonal extensions work smoothly with respect
to Dehn twists.
Lemma 2.4.37. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic, recurrent train track splitting sequence.
Consider the induced train tracks ρj := τj |X on a non-annular essential subsurface
X of S. Suppose that a subsequence τ (k, l) has twist nature with respect to a curve
γ ∈ C(X), and that rotτ (γ; k, l) = m ≥ 1.
If α ∈ C(ρN ) intersects γ essentially, then α traverses each branch of ρ0 contained
in ρ0 .γ at least m times.
Suppose now that each ρj fills S X ; let α be a curve essentially intersecting γ, with
α ∈ C(δN ) for some δN ∈ F(ρN ). Then there is a δ0 ∈ F(ρ0 ) carrying α, built from a
recurrent subtrack of ρ0 that fills S X and includes ρ0 .γ; and α traverses all branches
in δ0 .γ at least m − 1 times.
Proof. We prove the first statement. The set πN (γ) (α) is nonempty and contained in
N (γ)

N (γ)

C(ρl ). By definition of rotation number, each arc α0 ∈ C(ρl ) has hlα0 (k) > 2πm
N (γ)
so it traverses each branch in ρk .γ at least m times (see point 3 after Definition
2.4.17). So also α shall traverse each branch of ρk .γ at least m times; and the same
must be true in ρ0 .γ (see Remark 2.1.24). In particular this is true if one picks
α ∈ C(ρN ) ⊆ C(ρl ).
We work now on the second of the two statements. Without altering the truth
of the statement we can suppose, from this point on, that τ (k, l) has been already
replaced with the subdivision into Dehn twists with remainder guaranteed by Lemma
2.4.21. In particular we are replacing the original τl with a train track which is comb
equivalent to it; and therefore we are also operating some comb/uncomb moves after
the new τl , in order to continue smoothly with the original splitting sequence τ (l, N ).
This means that there is an index k ≤ r < l with τl = Dγεm (τr ) where ε is the
sign of γ as a twist curve. By Lemma 2.4.34, also ρl = Dγεm (ρr ); and clearly F(ρl ) =
Dγεm ·F(ρr ), so similar relations hold for the sets of carried curves: C(ρl ) = Dγεm ·C(ρr );
CF(ρl ) = Dγεm · CF(ρr ).
Rather than the original statement, we will prove this other one:
Let α be a curve essentially intersecting γ, carried by δl ∈ F(ρl ) which is a diagonal
extension of a recurrent subtrack σl of ρl that fills S X . Then there exists a δr0 ∈ F(ρr )
which is a diagonal extension of the recurrent subtrack σr = Dγ−εm (σl ) of ρr and
contains ρr .γ; and α traverses each branch in δr0 .γ at least m − 1 times.
123

This implies the desired statement as follows.

According to Lemma 2.2.29,

CF(ρN ) ⊆ CF(ρl ) so the above statement is true for α ∈ CF(ρN ) in particular.
Also, the last statement in that lemma ensures that not only CF(ρr ) ⊆ CF(ρ0 ), but
also there is a δ00 ∈ F(ρ0 ) fully carrying δr0 . In particular δ00 will carry both α and γ,
and α traverses at least m − 1 times any branch in δ00 .γ.
Let δr := Dγ−εm (δl ), and let α− := Dγ−εm (α) ∈ C(δr ). Without loss of generality,
we may suppose that σr complies with the following maximality property: any almost
track σr ( ξ ⊆ ρr has the property that a branch of ξ intersects one of δr at a point
that is interior for both branches; and this property remains true when changing ξ
up to isotopies fixing σr .
Our δr0 is going to be a diagonal extension of σr0 := σr ∪ ρr .γ — which is a generic
almost track, is recurrent as σr is, and fills S X . When σr = σr0 , one just takes δr0 := δr
and proves the desired claim using the first claim of the present lemma. When σr 6= σr0
instead, σr0 and δr are not subtracks of a common almost track, hence α− may not
be carried by any diagonal extension of σr0 ; nevertheless we will show that Dγε (α− ) is
carried by a suitable one, and this will allow us to conclude.
Step 1: finding an ‘efficient position’ for the extra branches in B(δr ) \ B(σr ) (similar
to what Definition 2.1.19 requires for curves): this will be necessary in order to avoid
monogons in the construction of δr0 . The construction has some points in common
with §4.2 in [MMS12].
Let a1 , . . . , as be an enumeration of the branches in B(δr )\B(σr ) that are traversed
by α− . For each i = 1, . . . , s, let Qi be the closure in S of the connected component
of S \ σr which contains ai . Also, if γ is a train path realization of γ in ρr (and in
u(i)

σr0 ), let βi1 , . . . , βi

be the maximal segments of this path which lie in Qi and are

not contained entirely in its boundary. Any two of them are not necessarily disjoint
but, since γ is wide in ρi , each branch of σr0 is not traversed more than twice in total,
with multiplicities, by this collection.
For each of the βij , let β ji be a smooth embedded path in N̄ (σr0 ) which is transverse
to all ties and has its extremes at two cusps in ∂Qi : β ji shall be constructed to be
parallel to βij but, at each extremity of βij , if it is not a corner of ∂Qi , β ji shall continue
traversing branches in ∂Qi , until a corner is reached. Also, we choose β ji to sit inside
int(Qi ), except for its endpoints; and all β ji to be disjoint from each other except
possibly for their endpoints.
Fix a branch b ∈ B(σr0 ) with b ⊆ Qi , such at least one of the following is true:
• b ⊆ ∂Qi and b is traversed by some β ji at least once;

u(i)

• b is traversed at least twice in total by the family {β ji }j=1 .
124

If b ⊆ ∂Qi , define the fold at b as the union of all sub-ties which are contained in
Rb ([−1, 1] × [−1, 1]) and have one endpoint along b and the other along some β ji .
Otherwise, define the fold at b as the union of all sub-ties which are contained in
Rb ([−1, 1] × [−1, 1]) and have both endpoints along some β ji . Informally, the fold at
b is a triangle or rectangle containing all chunks of the arcs β ji which traverse b: the
ones that one could sensibly fold together or fold to b.
Define a folding area as a maximal union of folds whose interior is connected. For
each folding area A, the boundary ∂A includes open subsets of a finite number of ties
of N (σr0 ). Cut A along each tie that has an open subset in ∂A, to get a collection
of folding
rectangles and triangles.
For A0 a folding rectangle or triangle, call ∂h A0 =


int ∂A0 ∩ (σr ∪ β 1i . . . ∪ β u(i)
) and ∂v A0 = int(∂A0 \ ∂h A0 ) ∪ (A0 ∩ (corners of ∂Qi )).
i
The two components of ∂h A0 are two tie-transverse arcs in N (σr0 ). They have the
same image under the tie collapse c : N̄0 (σr0 ) → σr0 : we call it the crush of ∂h A0 ; its
closure is a bounded train path in σr0 (up to reparametrization). Figure 2.12, left,
explains this construction.
We need to adjust each branch ai with respect to σr0 via isotopies which leave
their endpoints fixed and keep the inclusion ai ⊆ Qi , in order to attain an analogous
condition to efficient position for curves (Definition 2.1.19); in particular, we wish
that the newly obtained smooth paths a00i are still embedded in S X individually; but
they need not be pairwise disjoint.
More specifically, we require that, for each i:
1. a00i \ σr is connected and a00i ∩ σr0 is a union of branches of σr0 plus isolated points;
2. if i0 6= i but Qi0 = Qi , then a00i ∩ a00i0 shall be exactly one of the following:
empty, one common endpoint, or a union of branches of σr0 ; moreover, a00i0 cannot
intersect more than 1 component of Qi \ a00i ;
3. the association of each connected component of a00i ∩ σr0 with the connected
component of a00i ∩ N̄ (σr0 ) which contains it is a bijection;
4. given a connected component of a00i ∩ N̄ (σr0 ), it is either a single tie, or it is
transverse to all ties of N (σr0 ) it encounters; in this second case, each of its
endpoints either is a corner of ∂Qi or lies along ∂v N̄ (σr0 );
5. if a connected component of a00i ∩ σr0 is an isolated point, then either
• it is contained in ∂Qi and there is a component of a00i ∩ N̄0 (σr0 ) which
consists of exactly that point,
• or it is contained in a component of a00i ∩ N̄ (σr0 ) which is a tie of N̄ (σr0 );

125

βi2

β 2i

βi1
β 1i

β 3i
βi3

Figure 2.12: Left: The construction of the arcs β ji given βij in a complementary region Qi
of σr (dotted), and the related folding rectangles and triangles (marked with
black stripes). The twist collar Aγ is marked in grey. Right: Adaptation
of the arcs ai (dashed) with respect to a folding rectangle or triangle (here
shown with its foliation into ties). In short: every time ai does not enter
and exit the folding triangle/rectangle from opposite edges, we move it off.

6. if a given connected component of a00i ∩ σr0 is a union b of branches of σr0 , let B
be the corresponding connected component of a00i ∩ N̄ (σr0 ): then B \ b is entirely
contained in N̄ (σr0 ) \ N̄0 (σr0 );
7. however one chooses a finite-length smooth, embedded, path ρ along σr0 ∩ Qi
(not necessarily a train path), and a subarc a of a00i , which intersect exactly at
their endpoints, the region they bound together has negative index.
Note that, if one can choose two paths ρ and a as in condition 7 and they satisfy
it, then they can only delimit a 1-punctured bigon. If they exist but do not satify the
condition then, even admitting that a may degenerate to a single point, the region
they bound cannot be a zero-gon, monogon, or 1-punctured zero-gon/monogon.
In practice, the position described above can be attained with the process we are
about to describe. Start with isotoping the arcs ai so that their interiors remain
contained in the respective int(Qi ), pairwise disjoint, and each intersects each arc β ji
transversally, without forming bigons. Then, via slight perturbations, for each folding
triangle/rectangle A, make sure that no ai includes points of ∂A \ (∂h A ∪ ∂v A) (i.e.
the corners of the folding triangle/rectangle which are not cusps in ∂Qi ).
Let S be the set of all connected components of the intersections of the form ai ∩A,
for some 1 ≤ i ≤ s and A a folding rectangle or triangle. First, we make sure that,
126

a)

b1)

b2)

b3)

S
Figure 2.13: Ways to remove one of the innermost bigons between si=1 φ(ai ) and σr0 —
say one bounded by (ρ, a). The picture a) depicts the case of a bigon whose
corners are both tangential intersections of some ai (dashed) with a switch
of σr0 : the bigon can be crushed with a into σr0 . The pictures b1), b2), b3)
depict the case of a bigon with one corner being a transverse intersection
between φ(ai ) and σr0 , and the other a tangential one. The idea is to move
a across ρ in order to remove completely the transverse intersection point.
In b1) a new tangential intersection point is introduced at a switch along
the σr0 -edge of the cancelled bigon; in b2) a tangential intersection point is
introduced at a switch not along that edge; in b3) none is introduced at all.
None of these moves increases the number of innermost bigons, but it may
leave it unvaried: in b3) another arc φ(ai0 ) is marked in grey to show how it
may happen. In any case the number x decreases. The arc φ(ai0 ) depicted
also shows how condition 2 is not violated when moving φ(ai ).

Aγ

a1

Aγ
a3

β21 = β31

a2

β22

Aγ

Aγ

Figure 2.14: An example of the way the construction of δr0 works in one of the complementary regions of σr , in this case Q1 = Q2 = Q3 . The arcs β·· are part of
ρr .γ (in this picture they share a branch traversed twice by γ), and a twist
collar for the latter is marked in grey. Branches a1 , a2 , a3 ∈ B(δr ) \ B(σr0 )
(picture to the left) are drawn with a dashed line. The arrows around the
β·· show the instructions to ‘bend’ the segments ej to get the corresponding
e0j in N (σr0 .γ). The picture to the right shows the new branches that are
added to σr0 to get σr00 . A cross marks a new branch that forms a bigon with
another one, thus is to be excluded from the definition of δr0 .

127

for every ai and every folding rectangle or triangle A, every connected component of
ai ∩ A has its endpoints either on the two opposite components of ∂h A, or the two
opposite components of ∂v A (remember: one of the latter may be a single point).
This is done as specified in Figure 2.12: the process comes to an end, because moving
one or more portions of the arcs ai off a folding rectangle/triangle results into making
the cardinality of S strictly lower.
When performing each of these moves, we keep the interiors of the ai pairwise
disjoint, thus they comply with a stricter version of condition 2 in the list above.
When nothing is left to move off, they can also be supposed to intersect σr0 only in
isolated points, thus complying with a stricter version of condition 1. We can also
suppose that conditions 3, 4 are satisfied by all ai provided that the tie neighbourhood
is chosen wisely.
Let now φ : S X → S X be a smooth map complying with the following requests.
On the points belonging σr0 , to any of the β ji , or to any folding area — denote Y the
set of all these points — φ coincides with the tie collapse c : N̄0 (σr0 ) → σr0 . φ is then
defined to be homotopic to idS X , with φ|S X \Y injective, φ|N̄ (σr0 ) keeping each point
along the same tie, and φ(S X \ Y ) ∩ σr0 = ∅.
The family {φ(ai )} is seen to comply with all conditions 1–6 that the family
{a00i }

is required to satisfy (possibly adapting the tie neighbourhood N̄ (σr0 )), but not

necessarily condition 7. However, it is impossible that a segment of one of the φ(ai )
bounds, together with a smooth embedded path along σr0 , a bigon whose corners are
each a transverse intersection point between some φ(ai ) and some branch of σr0 . If
there were one such bigon, then necessarily there would be a bigon bounded by the
corresponding ai and one of the β ji .
Now, let x be the number of pairs (ρ, a) which transgress condition 7: ρ is a
smooth path along σr0 , a is a subarc of one of the φ(ai ), ρ and a intersect exactly at
their endpoints, and they bound a bigon. In Figure 2.13 it is shown how to set up
a procedure that recursively considers an innermost bigon bounded by some (ρ, a),
and moves φ(ai ) off the bigon to decrease x strictly. At each stage of the recursion,
one shall probably perform isotopies to make sure that the position with respect to
N̄ (σr0 ) keeps respecting conditions 3–6. When it is impossible to proceed with the
recursion any further, condition 7 will also be satisfied; while conditions 1 and 2 will
be still satisfied, too. Define the family {a00i } to be the set of arcs eventually attained.
S
Finally, define δr00 := σr ∪ ( si=1 a00i ). It is clear that δr00 carries α− .
Step 2: Construction of δr0 .

128

Before we start with this step, we announce that the construction of δr0 will consist
of removing any transverse intersection between the family {a00i } and σr0 : the arcs a00i
will be ‘broken’ at each transverse intersection point, and then bent as Dγε would
do, in order to get attached to a switch of σr0 . In Step 3 we will see why δr0 thus
constructed carries α.
The curve γ is a twist curve in σr0 : the first condition in Definition 2.4.2 is clearly
verified; the second one is, too, because σr0 is recurrent. In particular γ inherits the
twist collar Aγ from ρr . As it was already done previously, we suppose that the
component of Λ of ∂ Āγ which is not part of σr0 .γ coincides with a component of
∂ N̄ (σr0 .γ).
S
Enumerate (in any way) e1 , . . . , et the ‘half-ties’ contained in ( si=1 a00i ) ∩ N̄ (σr0 .γ),
i.e., for each connected component e of this intersection which is a tie, the two opposite
segments of it, from e ∩ σr0 .γ to ∂ N̄ (σr0 ), are two of the elements of the list. Let then
Pj be the endpoint of the corresponding ej that lies along ∂ N̄ (σr0 ); and let i(j) be
the only value of 1 ≤ i ≤ s such that ej ⊂ a00i . We wish to define, for each j, a new
arc e0j contained in N̄0 (σr0 ) whose endpoints are Pj and a suitable switch of σr0 .
To do so, we perform the following construction for each ej , one after another
according to their order — see also Figure 2.14. Supposing that e01 , . . . , e0j−1 have been
constructed, consider the closures of the connected components of (N̄0 (σr0 )∩Qi(j) )\σr0 :
each of them is bounded by a smooth component of ∂ N̄0 (σr0 ) and a bounded train
path along σr0 .γ, and therefore is a bigon, with its edges transverse to the ties of σr0 ,
and corners (cusps) at switches of σr0 . Let then Ej ⊆ Qi(j) be the region among these
which contains ej .
Define e0j to be an arc in Ej with the following properties:
• e0j ∩ ∂Ej consists exactly of the endpoints of e0j , which shall be Pj and one of
the cusps of ∂Ej ;
• e0j is transverse to all ties it meets;
• e0j runs in parallel with (part) of one of the arcs β ...
; moreover it proceeds in
i(j)
the verse consistent with the Aγ -orientation if ej ⊆ Aγ , and in the opposite
verse otherwise;
S
• e0j is part of a smooth path that begins at a point of ( si=1 a00i ) \ N̄ (σr0 .γ), enters
e0j from Pj and, after leaving it, continues entering a branch in σr0 and following
it;
• e0j is disjoint from all e0j 0 for j 0 < j.
Note that these conditions determine uniquely what is the endpoint of e0j other than
Pj .
129

We claim that e0j ⊆ N̄ (σr0 .γ). This is clear if ej ⊆ Aγ : as e0j proceeds in the
Aγ -orientation, eventually it must travel between σr0 .γ and a branch end hitting Aγ
(there is one necessarily, because σr0 .γ intersects more than one of the regions Qi ),
and is forced to reach the switch between the two. Since this switch belongs to a
branch end hitting Aγ , it must necessarily be located along ∂Qi(j) .
In case ej ∩ Aγ = ∅, the analysis is slightly more involved. Suppose that e0j ,
starting at Pj , and proceeding along an arc β among the β ...
, oppositely to the Aγ i(j)
0
orientation, leaves N (σr .γ). Then this event must occur just after e0j has traversed
a large branch end in σr0 .γ. The first branch end η1 traversed which is not in σr0 .γ
is then, necessarily, one that avoids Aγ ; and it is adverse, due to the orientation of
e0j . Also, η1 is included in some smooth edge λ of ∂Qi . Necessarily, β does not travel
along the entire length of λ but only a portion.
This means that γ traverses a large branch b of σr0 , contained in the interior of λ,
and then gets out of λ on the side opposite to Qi(j) . Let η2 be the branch end of σr0 ,
contained in λ, which shares with b the switch other than the one b shares with η1 .
Then η1 , η2 are branch ends giving γ opposite orientations; so, as η2 is a branch end
hitting Aγ , η1 is necessarily a favourable one, a contradiction.

S
S
t
0
e
When this process is done, define σr00 := σr0 ∪ ( si=1 (a00i \ N0 (σr0 ))) ∪
j=1 j . In
general σr00 is not a train track as there may be bigons among the complementary
regions of S \ σr00 . Monogons, nullgons and 1-punctured nullgons are to be excluded
instead, as they would require either a00i to bound a bigon with σr0 , or σr00 to have more
switches than σr0 .
Define δr0 to be a maximal subtrack of σr00 which includes σr0 and is a train track.
Practically speaking, define δr0 by deleting any branch in B(σr00 ) \ B(σr0 ) which bounds
a bigon together with a train path along σr0 ; and furthermore, every time there are
two branches in B(σr00 ) \ B(σr0 ) surviving after this operation, and bounding a bigon
together, delete one of them. As each of these operations affects only one of the
regions {Qi }, and any innermost bigon has to be entirely contained in one of these
regions, the suggested procedure is able to remove the extra branches without leaving
any bigon in δr0 .
The curve γ is carried by δr0 and is again a twist curve there.
We consider a tie neighbourhood for δr00 built with the following constraints: N̄ (δr00 )
and N̄ (σr0 ) induce one same tie neighbourhood N (σr ) for their common subtrack
σr ; each transverse intersection point between δr00 and σr0 is contained in a connected
component of N̄ (δr00 ) ∩ N̄ (σr0 ) which is diffeomorphic to a square, and the tie foliations

130

Figure 2.15: A choice of tie neighbourhoods related to a portion of the previous Figure
2.14. The picture on the left shows how N (σr0 ) (chequerboard-coloured) and
N (δr00 ) (grey) intersect and define on their common subtrack σr the same tie
neighbourhood N (σr ) (black). The picture on the right shows a choice of
N (σr00 ), contained in σr0 (painted in grey here) and coinciding with it outside
N̄ (σr0 .γ).

given by the two tie neighbourhoods are each parallel to one of the two pairs of
opposite edges of the square.
From this, we build a tie neighbourhood for σr00 too, with the property that
N̄ (σr00 ) ⊆ N̄ (σr0 .γ) ∪ N̄ (δr00 ); N̄ (σr00 ) \ N̄ (σr0 .γ) = N̄ (δr00 ) \ N̄ (σr0 .γ); and all ties in
each rectangle Rb , for b a branch of σr00 which is part of σr00 .γ, are sub-ties of Rb0 , for
b0 ∈ B(σr0 ) a branch contained in σr0 .γ (b, b0 are actually the same branch, regarded as
part of the two different almost tracks). This means that the branch end rectangles
Re0j have their image contained in N̄ (σr0 .γ), albeit with a new specification for their
ties. This definition of tie neighbourhood induces a tie neighbourhood for δr0 , and
again one for σr , which does not coincide with the N (σr ) previously defined. An
example of these constructions is given in Figure 2.15.
We will now use, several times, the notation N (σr0 .γ) to mean specifically the tie
neighbourhood induced by N (σr0 ): it is necessary to clarify this, because σr00 .γ (or
δr0 .γ), albeit coinciding with σr0 .γ setwise, inherits a different tie neighbourhood from
σr00 (or δr0 ). Similarly we will use N (σr00 .σr0 ), N (σr00 .σr ) to mean the tie neighbourhoods
inherited from σr00 , as opposed to N (σr0 ) the ‘native’ tie neighbourhood and N (σr ) the
tie neighbourhood that σr inherits from σr0 or, equivalently, from δr00 . Note that not
only N̄ (σr00 .σr0 ) ⊆ N̄ (σr0 ) but there is a diffeomorphism f : N̄ (σr0 ) → N̄ (σr00 .σr0 ) sending
each tie of N̄ (σr0 ) to a subset of it.
For each βij , let Xij be the connected component of N̄ (σr0 )\N (σr ) which intersects
it.
Step 3: Dγε (α− ) is carried by δr0 , and conclusion.
Let α− be a carried realization of α− in N̄ (δr00 ) and γ be a carried realization of γ
in N̄ (σr ) (therefore it is one in N̄ (σr0 ) and in N̄ (δr00 ), too), with the properties that:
131

they intersect transversely, minimally among the pairs of curves in the respective
homotopy classes; each of the connected components of α− ∩ N̄ (σr0 ) is either of the
following:
• transverse to all ties, with its endpoints on ∂v N̄ (σr0 );
• a single tie of N̄ (σr0 ).
This property may be required because of the previously specified intersection pattern between N̄ (σr0 ) and N̄ (δr00 ). Similarly, we require that each of the connected
components of γ ∩ N̄ (δr00 ) is either:
• transverse to all ties of N̄ (δr00 ) (but this time its endpoints may lie on ∂h N̄ (δr00 ),
too);
• a single tie of N̄ (δr00 ).
We are about to construct a carried realization of α+ := Dγε (α− ). What we will
do, informally, is realize the Dehn twist on α− by bending each transverse intersection
of α− in N̄ (δr00 ) to follow the branches of σr00 , which have been introduced as a bending
of the branches of δr00 , specifically for this idea to work; and by making the carried
portions of α− in σr0 wind once more about σr0 .γ. Once a carried realization of Dγε (α− )
in σr00 is proved to exist, it will be clear that there exists one in δr0 , too.
Let T be a (narrow) regular neighbourhood of γ in N̄ (σr0 .γ), and let DT be a
concrete realization of the Dehn twist about γ, chosen to be the identity map outside
T.
Let Ξ := α− ∩ N̄ (σr0 .γ). It is legitimate to suppose that there is a bijection between
the connected components of Ξ ∩ T and the points of Ξ ∩ γ.
Recall that Λ is the connected component of ∂ Āγ which is also a connected component of ∂ N̄ (σr0 .γ). Given a connected component ξ of Ξ, we have that ξ ∩ γ 6= ∅
if and only if ξ has one endpoint along Λ, and the other endpoint along some other
component of ∂ N̄ (σr0 .γ). If this is not the case, any intersection point between γ
and α− , located along ξ, could be deleted by moving γ via isotopies, and this would
reduce their total amount, a contradiction.
So, if a connected component ξ intersects γ and is not a tie, orient it from its
endpoint along Λ towards the other one: then we have that ξ traverses the ties
according to the Aγ -orientation. This is the case because, at the point where ξ
begins, either α− is entering N̄ (σr0 .γ) by traversing a branch end of σr0 which hits Aγ ;
or α− has just entered N̄ (σr0 ) via a component of ∂v N̄ (σr0 ) which has an endpoint
along Λ.
Define Ξ0 = DTε (Ξ): then the curve α+ := (α− \Ξ)∪Ξ0 is a loop in S in the isotopy
class of α+ . Moreover α+ \ N (σr0 .γ) is transverse to all ties of N̄ (δr00 ), and therefore
132

of N̄ (σr00 ), it encounters. We wish to isotope Ξ0 so that it is entirely contained in
N̄ (σr00 ) ∩ N̄ (σr0 .γ), and is transverse to the ties of N̄ (σr00 ). After the end of this
modification, the resulting α+ is a carried realization of α+ in N̄ (σr00 ).
Regardless of what are the properties of the single connected components Ξ0 , after
a small perturbation leaving fixed the endpoints of each connected component and not
altering the intersection pattern, is transverse to all ties of N̄ (σr0 .γ). Moreover, given
any component of Ξ0 with an endpoint along Λ, if one orients it from this endpoint
towards the other one, then one actually gets the Aγ -orientation on it.
j

For each Xij , each connected component ζ of Ξ0 ∩ X i falls into one of the two
following cases:
• ζ has one endpoint along ∂h N̄ (σr0 ). In this case ζ is part of DTε (ξ), for ξ a
connected component of Ξ which is a tie of N̄ (σr0 .γ). The other endpoint of
ζ lies necessarily along ∂ N̄ (σr ). Furthermore, there is one of the branch ends
e0u defined in Step 2 such that the first endpoint of ζ lies actually along the tie
Re0u ({0} × [−1, 1]) of N̄ (σr00 ), and such that Re0u intersects the same connected
j
component of X i ∩ ∂ N̄ (σr ) on which the second endpoint of ζ lies. Informally,
ζ traverses, in the same order, the ties of N̄ (σ 0 .γ) that e0u traverses.
• both endpoints of ζ are away from ∂h N̄ (σr0 ). This includes the case of ζ being
part of DTε (ξ), for ξ a connected component of Ξ which does not intersect γ —
so that, actually, DTε (ξ) = ξ.
Recall the diffeomorphism f : N̄ (σr0 ) → N̄ (σr00 .σr0 ) defined above, and define Ξ0f
as follows. Given any connected component ξ 0 of Ξ0 , attach to each extreme point of
f (ξ 0 ) not lying along ∂h N̄ (σr0 .γ) a segment of tie in N̄ (σr0 .γ), so as to obtain a path
in N̄ (σr0 .γ) with both endpoints lying along ∂ N̄ (σr0 .γ). Let then Ξ0f be the union
of all paths thus obtained: (α− \ Ξ) ∪ Ξ0f is again a representative of α+ . Now the
j

components ζ of Ξ0f ∩ X i behave again as in one of the bullets above, but the ones in
the second bullet are entirely contained in N̄ (σr00 ), and the ones in the first bullet may
be isotoped, leaving their endpoints fixed, so that they end up entirely contained in
the relevant Re0u , transversely to its ties.
This gives the announced, desired realization of Ξ0 ; and we have proved that α+ is
carried by σr00 and, as it was anticipated above, this is enough to say that it is carried
by δr0 , too: if α+ traverses any branch of σr00 which is not found in δr0 , there is another
branch or union of branches with the same endpoints, which is is subset of δr0 instead:
so the carried realization of α+ may be adjusted to traverse this other branch instead.
Note that δr0 is recurrent, as each branch is traversed by either α+ or by an
element of C(σr0 ). Let η be a generic almost track which is comb equivalent to δr0 :
133

then α+ ∈ C(η) and there is a generic splitting sequence of twist nature which turns
ε(m−1)

(η); its rotation number is m − 1 (see Lemma 2.4.15,
 and point
 3 of
ε(m−1)
ε(m−1)
Remark 2.4.20). Note that, by definition, α = Dγ
(α+ ) ∈ C Dγ
(η) : so,
by the first statement of the present lemma, α traverses each branch in η.γ at least

η into Dγ

m − 1 times. This property is not affected by comb equivalences: so the same is true
for the carrying image of α in δr0 .



Given an almost track ρ (in S X , say), we give a generalized version of the definitions specified in §2.2.4. If α1 , . . . , αs ∈ C(ρ) and k ≥ 1, denote:



 α traverses at least k times each branch
.
Ck (ρ; α1 , . . . , αs ) := α ∈ C(ρ) 
contained in one of the ρ.αj
S
:=
Denote subsequently CEk (ρ; α1 , . . . , αs )
and
δ∈E(ρ) Ck (δ; α1 , . . . , αs );
S
CFk (ρ; α1 , . . . , αs ) := ω CEk (ω; α1 , . . . , αs ), where the union is performed over all ω
subtracks of ρ which fill S X , and include ρ.αj for all j.
Lemma 2.4.38. In the setting of Proposition 2.4.33, suppose a subsequence (γtj )rj=1
of the sequence of curves (γj ) fills a subsurface X ⊂ S which is homeomorphic to S0,4
or S1,1 .
Fix a− ≤ min DIt1 , and a+ ≥ max DItr such that V (τa+ |X) 6= ∅. Then, for any
α− ∈ V (τa− |X), α+ ∈ V (τa+ |X),
dX (α− , α+ ) ≥ b(r − 1)/3c.
Proof. This proof is based on the ideas used to prove Theorem 1.3 in [MM04] (stated
as Theorem 2.3.4 in the present work). We will use the notation ρj = τj |X and,
in order to avoid introducing further notation, we denote our γtj ’s simply as γj ’s,
forgetting about the other effective twist curves. We do the same with the notation
for the intervals DIj and similar ones. For each j, let mj := rot(γj ; DIj ). Also, for
1 ≤ j ≤ r − 1 set aj := min DIj and, asymmetrically, set also ar := max DIr−1 .
Note that each pair of distinct curves γj , γj 0 intersect and fill X — and S X —
because X is a 4-holed sphere or a 1-holed torus. So, for all 1 ≤ j ≤ r, ρaj fills S X as
it carries two of these curves.
Suppose 3 ≤ j ≤ r. Then aj−2 < max DIj−2 ≤ aj−1 < max DIj−1 ≤ aj . Lemma
2.4.37, applied to τ (aj−2 , aj ) with respect to the twist curve γj−1 , yields that γj ∈
C(ραj ) traverses at least 2K0 + 4 times each branch of ρaj−2 contained in ρaj−2 .γj−1 .
The same lemma, applied with respect to the twist curve γj−2 , yields also that γj
traverses at least 2K0 + 4 times each branch of ρaj−2 contained in ρaj−2 .γj−2 .
134

Let now 4 ≤ j ≤ r, and fix α ∈ CF(ρaj ): we want to show that α ∈ CF3 (ρaj−3 ).
If α = γj−1 a completely similar argument to the one just applied, considered for
the sequence τ (aj−3 , aj ) with respect to the two twist curves γj−3 , γj−2 , yields γj−1 ∈
C3 (ρaj−3 ; γj−2 , γj−3 ) ⊂ CF3 (ρaj−3 ). (Actually we might as well conclude that γj−1 ∈
C2K0 +4 (ρaj−3 ; γj−2 , γj−3 ), but we do not need it; also in the following inclusions, we
will only care about branches being traversed thrice.) The last inclusion is due to the
fact that, as γj−2 , γj−3 fill S X , also ρaj−3 .γj−2 ∪ ρaj−3 .γj−3 is an almost track filling
S X , and C3 (ρaj−3 ; γj−2 , γj−3 ) ⊆ CE3 (ρaj−3 .γj−2 ∪ ρaj−3 .γj−3 ).
If α is any other curve, it will intersect γj−1 . The following chain of inclusions
holds:
• α ∈ CF3 (ρaj−1 ; γj−1 ), by Lemma 2.4.37 applied to the sequence τ (aj−1 , aj ) with
respect to the twist curve γj−1 .
• CF3 (ρaj−1 ; γj−1 ) ⊂ CF3 (ρaj−3 ; γj−1 ), because of Lemma 2.2.29: first of all,
clearly ρaj−1 is carried by ρaj−3 and, as noted above, both almost tracks fill
S X . If a curve β is carried by δ 0 , diagonal extension of σ 0 which is a subtrack
of ρaj−1 which fills S X and contains ρaj−1 .γj−1 , and β traverses all branches in
σ 0 .γj−1 at least thrice, then consider the almost tracks δ and σ given by the last
statement of said Lemma, with σ a subtrack of ρaj−3 : necessarily σ ⊃ ρaj−3 .γj−1
and, by composition of carrying maps, β in δ traverses each branch in ρaj−3 .γj−1
at least thrice.
• CF3 (ρaj−3 ; γj−1 ) ⊂ CF3 (ρaj−3 ; γj−1 , γj−2 , γj−3 ) ⊂ CF3 (ρaj−3 ): the first of these
two inclusions is just due to the argument above (with translated indices) that
ρaj−3 .γj−1 will traverse all branches carrying γj−2 , γj−3 . The second one is
due to the fact that CF3 (ρaj−3 ; γj−1 , γj−2 , γj−3 ) = CE3 (ρaj−3 .γj−1 ∪ ρaj−3 .γj−2 ∪
ρaj−3 .γj−3 ).
Lemma 2.2.31, together with this chain of inclusions, yields that N1 (CF(ρaj )) ⊆
N1 (CF3 (ρaj−3 )) ⊆ CF(ρaj−3 ). And, nesting these last found inclusions for different
values of j, for any pair of indices 1 ≤ i < i0 ≤ r such that 3|(i0 − i) we get

N(i0 −i)/3 CF(ρai0 ) ⊆ CF(ρai ).
Denote r̂ := b(r − 1)/3c. If, for any α+ ∈ V (ρa+ ) ⊆ CF(ρa3r̂+1 ), α− ∈ V (ρa− ), we
have dX (α− , α+ ) < r̂, then
α− ∈ Nr̂−1 (CF(ρa3r̂+1 )) ⊆ CF(ρa4 ) ⊆ CF3 (ρa1 ),
as a consequence of the inclusions proved above. Also, CF3 (ρa1 ) ⊆ CF3 (ρa− ), by an
argument entirely similar to the inclusion shown in the second bullet above.
135

But α− ∈ CF3 (ρa− ) cannot be true because of Lemma 2.2.33. So dX (α− , α+ ) ≥ r̂,
and this proves the claim.



Lemma 2.4.39. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a splitting sequence of generic, recurrent almost tracks on a surface S, such that τ (k, l) has twist nature about a curve γ, with
rotτ (γ; k, l) ≥ 2K0 + 4. Let Y ⊂ S be a subsurface with γ essentially intersecting ∂Y .
Let 0 ≤ a− ≤ k < l ≤ a+ ≤ N , and let α− ∈ W (τa− ), α+ ∈ W (τa+ ) with the
properties that
• α− ⊂ Y (when choosing appropriate representatives in their isotopy classes);
• α+ ∩ Y 6= ∅ (however the representative of α+ is chosen);
• both α− , α+ intersect γ essentially.
Then α+ intersects ∂Y essentially.
Proof. Let X be a regular neighbourhood of γ, let m := rotτ (γ; k, l) and let c− =
max{min Iγ , a− }, c+ = min{max Iγ , a+ }. Then c− ≤ k < l ≤ c+ .
As α− ∈ W (τa− ), then also πX (α− ) ⊆ V (τaX− ): if any arc πX (α− ) traverses a
branch of τaX− twice in the same direction (this is the only way it may not be wide:
see point 4 in Remark 2.2.9), then also α− traverses a branch of τa− twice in the same
direction. Similarly, πX (α+ ) ⊆ V (τaX+ ).

From the statement 1 of Theorem 2.3.2 we have dC(X) τa− |X, τc− |X ≤ K0 and

dC(X) V (τc+ |X), πX (α+ ) ≤ K0 .
Note that πX (∂Y ) 6= ∅, and as ∂Y, α− do not intersect, dX (∂Y, α− ) = 1. The triangle inequality holds for dC(X) even when its arguments are sets, so

dC(X) πX (∂Y ), V (τc− |X) ≤ K0 + 1. Subsequently,


dX (∂Y, α+ ) ≥ dC(X) V (τc− |X), V (τc+ |X) − dC(X) πX (∂Y ), V (τc− |X) +


−dC(X) V (τc+ |X), πX (α+ ) ≥ dC(X) V (τc− |X), V (τc+ |X) − 2K0 − 1

again by the triangle inequality; and dC(X) V (τc− |X), V (τc+ |X) ≥ rotτ (γ; c− , c+ ) ≥
m as seen in point 7 of Remark 2.4.20.
Since m ≥ 2K0 + 4, we have dX (∂Y, α+ ) ≥ 3, meaning in particular that πX (α+ )
intersects πX (∂Y ). Thus also α+ intersects ∂Y as required.

Corollary 2.4.40. In the setting of Proposition 2.4.33, let 1 ≤ t1 < t2 < t3 ≤ q
be three indices, and let Y ⊆ S be a subsurface, with the following properties: γt2
essentially intersects both γt1 , γt3 ; γt1 ⊂ Y , γt2 essentially intersects ∂Y ; and γt3
cannot be realized disjointly from Y as a curve on S.
Then γt3 intersects ∂Y essentially, too.
136

This statement may be read as follows: once a chain subsequence breaks out of a
given subsurface Y , no subsequent entry will enter it again.
Proof. Apply the previous lemma with γ = γt2 , [k, l] = DIt2 , a− = max DIt1 , a+ =
min DIt3 , α− = γt1 , α+ = γt3 . We have rotτ (γt2 ; DIt2 ) ≥ 2K0 + 4 by definition of
Dehn interval.

Proposition 2.4.33 will be proved employing an auxiliary statement, by induction
on the complexity ξ(X 0 ) of subsurfaces X 0 ⊆ X ⊆ S. Its proof will be based on the
ideas used to prove Theorem 1.3 in [MM04].
Fix any chain subsequence δ = (δ1 , . . . , δr ) of (γ1 , . . . , γq ); let X 0 ⊆ S be the
subsurface which is filled by this chain subsequence. We say that X 0 is 0-good with
respect to the given chain. Note that, as δ is a chain, X 0 is connected.
We give a recursive definition of two functions /, . : [1, r] → [1, r], which are
auxiliary to δ. The idea is that, for each index 1 ≤ i ≤ r, the following holds:
i ∈ [/i, .i]; the curves in δ indexed by [/i, .i] fill a proper subsurface of X 0 ; and it is
impossible to pick a larger interval with the same property. However, we would also
like that, every time two indices i 6= i00 have [/i, .i] 6= [/i00 , .i00 ] and these two intervals
both give families of curves not filling the entire X 0 , there is an index i < i0 < i00 such
that the curves indexed by [/i0 , .i0 ] do fill X 0 instead.
Start by setting /1 := 1, and let .1 be the highest index L such that the curves
δ1 , . . . , δL do not fill X 0 . Now, given an index 1 < i0 ≤ r, suppose we have defined
/i, .i for all i < i0 : if .(i0 − 1) ≥ i0 , set /i0 := /(i0 − 1), .i0 := .(i0 − 1). Else let
/i0 := /(i0 − 1) and .i0 := i0 , so that the curves δ/i0 , . . . , δ.i0 fill X 0 ; furthermore, let
/(i0 + 1) := i0 + 1, and let .(i0 + 1) be the highest index L such that δi0 +1 , . . . , δL do
not fill X 0 .
For each i, let δ(i) = (δ/i , . . . , δ.i ), and let Y (i) be the subsurface of X 0 filled by
the curves in δ(i). We call elements of the family {Y (i)|1 ≤ i ≤ r} \ {X 0 } the 1-good
subsurfaces.
Again with a recursive definition, for k > 1 we say that Z ⊆ S is a k-good
subsurface with respect to δ if there is an index 1 ≤ i ≤ r such that Y (i) 6= X 0 and
Z is a (k − 1)-good subsurface of Y (i), computed with respect to the chain δ(i).
Also, a subsurface of S is good with respect to δ if it is k-good for some k ∈ N.
We prove a fact about good subsurfaces:
Given Z ( X 0 a good subsurface (with respect to δ), there is at most one 1-good
subsurface Y such that Z ⊆ Y . Moreover two subsurfaces Y (i), Y (i0 ) which are
( X 0 , but such that Y (i00 ) = X 0 for some i < i00 < i0 , are certainly distinct.
137

Proof. We prove the two claims together, with an an argument by contradiction
that works for both. Supposing that either of the two is false may be restated as
the following hypothesis: there is a good subsurface Z (for the second statement,
Z := Y (i) = Y (i0 )), contained in two 1-good subsurfaces Y (i), Y (i0 ), not necessarily
distinct but with an index i < i00 < i0 with Y (i00 ) = X 0 .
This means that Z, when appearing as a good subsurface of Y (i) with respect to
the chain δ(i), gets filled by some curves δι− , . . . , δι+ , for /i ≤ ι− < ι+ ≤ .i. Similarly
with respect to the index i0 : Z is filled by δι0− , . . . , δι0+ , for /i0 ≤ ι0− < ι0+ ≤ .i0 .
But, by definition, {δι− , . . . , δι0+ } ⊇ {δ/i00 , . . . , δ.i00 }: so these families both fill X 0 .
Therefore there is some δι(2) (for ι+ < ι(2) < ι0− ) intersecting ∂Z; moreover there
are ι− ≤ ι(1) ≤ ι+ , ι0− ≤ ι(3) ≤ ι0+ such that both δι(1) and δι(3) intersect δι(2) : this
is because we are picking from two families of curves that fill Z. Since the curves
δι(1) , δι(2) , δι(3) , in the given order, are taken from the sequence (γ1 , . . . , γq ) with respect
to which τ is arranged, this contradicts Corollary 2.4.40 above.



The definition of /, . and the second statement of this claim together imply what
follows. Let 1 < x1 < . . . < xη ≤ r are the indices i such that Y (i) = X 0 (in particular,
for these indices, .i = i); note that this collection includes no two consecutive values
of i. If an interval I of consecutive indices i does not include any of these ones, then
the corresponding Y (i) are always the same surface. If 1 ≤ i < xj < i0 ≤ r for some
1 ≤ j ≤ η, and Y (i), Y (i0 ) 6= X 0 , then Y (i) 6= Y (i0 ). So the number η 0 of 1-good
subsurfaces of X 0 equals either η or η + 1. The quantities η, η 0 will be recalled below.
Let Y1 , . . . , Yη0 be an enumeration of these subsurfaces, in the same order as the
sequence (Y (i))i but avoiding repetitions and occurrences of X 0 . And, for each 1 ≤
u ≤ η 0 , if Yu = Y (i), let δu = δ(i) be the chain sequence, subsequence of δ, certifying
that Yu is a good subsurface. This is independent of the choice of i.
Now define, for 0 ≤ j, j 0 ≤ N ,
X

d00δ (τj , τj 0 ) :=
Y

⊆X 0

[dY (τj , τj 0 )]M .

good w.r.t. δ

Clearly, d00δ (τj , τj 0 ) ≤ d0P+ (X 0 ) (τj , τj 0 ). We prove the following claim:
Given the arranged sequence τ = (τj )N
j=0 as in the statement of Proposition 2.4.33,
let δ = (δ1 := γt1 , . . . , δr := γtr ) be a chain subsequence of the (γt )qt=1 (t1 < . . . < tr ),
and call X 0 ⊆ S (X 0 = S is allowed here) the essential, non-annular subsurface
filled by the curves in δ. Let a− ≤ min DIt1 , a+ ≥ max DItr be two indices along the

sequence τ , with πX 0 V (τa+ ) ∈ P+ 0 (X 0 ).
138

Then there are two constants c3 , c4 , only depending on the topological types of S and
X 0 , such that r ≤ c3 d00δ (τa− , τa+ ) + c4 (which is in turn ≤ c3 d0P+ (X 0 ) (τa− , τa+ ) + c4 ).
Proof. Step 1: Set-up of the induction on ξ(X 0 ).
As previously noted (Lemma 2.2.11 and subsequent observations), the condition

πX 0 V (τa+ ) ∈ P+ 0 (X 0 ) implies that, for all a− ≤ j ≤ a+ and all subsurfaces Y ⊆ X 0 ,
πY (V (τj )) ∈ P+ 0 (Y ).
For ease of notation, for i = 1, . . . , r let ai := min DIti , and mi := rotτ (δi , DIti ).
Let moreover ρj := τj |X 0 for all j.
The induction basis is for X 0 ∼
= S0,4 or ∼
= S1,1 . In that case



d00P+ (X 0 ) τa− , τa+ = dX 0 V (τa− ), V (τa+ ) ≥ dC(X 0 ) V (ρa− ), V (ρa+ ) − 2ñ1
where ñ1 := 2F (8N1 (S)) (see Lemma 2.2.13). Lemma 2.4.38, applied with reference

to the family δ1 , . . . , δr , yields that dC(X 0 ) V (ρa− ), V (ρa+ ) ≥ r/3 − 1. So the claim
is proved with c3 (X 0 ) = 3, c4 (X 0 ) = 3(1 + 2ñ1 ).
We get now to the induction step, i.e. prove that the statement holds for X 0 ,
provided that X 0 is not homeomorphic to S0,4 or S1,1 and that the statement holds
for any essential, non-annular Y ( X 0 .
Step 2: For any α− ∈ V (τa− ) and α+ ∈ V (τa+ ), dC(X 0 ) (α− , α+ ) ≥ b(η − 1)/2c.
For 1 ≤ j ≤ η consider the previously defined xj and let σj := ρa/xj . As already
noted, for any fixed 1 ≤ j ≤ η, the chain sequence δ(xj ) = {δ/xj , . . . , δxj } fills X 0 .
As all curves in each sequence δ(xj ) are carried by the respective σj , each σj fills X 0 ;
and, by Lemma 2.2.29, CF(σj ) ⊇ CF(σj+1 ).
If a curve δk belongs to the sequence δ(xj+1 ) (for 1 ≤ j < r), then it belongs to
the set C1 (σj ; δ(xj )): this is because, for each i ∈ [(/xj ) + 1, k], δi ∈ C(ρai ) intersects
the previous δi−1 ; so, according to the first statement of Lemma 2.4.37 applied to
the sequence τ (a/xj , ai ), we have σj .δi ⊇ σj .δi−1 . Therefore σj .δk includes all σj .δ for
δ ∈ δ(xj ), and this is exactly what has just been claimed.
Now, for 1 ≤ j ≤ η − 2 consider any curve α ∈ CF(σj+2 ): α will intersect
some δ ∈ δ(xj+1 ) because that collection fills X 0 . So Lemma 2.4.37, applied along
the sequence τ (a/xj , a/xj+2 ) with respect to the twist curve δ, yields that there is
a diagonal extension ωj of a subtrack of σj which fills X 0 , where α is carried with
ωj .α ⊇ ωj .δ = σj .δ; and, as σj .δ contains all the carrying images in σj of the curves
in δ(xj ), it is a subtrack filling X 0 : α ∈ CF1 (σj ).

139

Lemma 2.2.31 gives then CF(σj+2 ) ⊆ CF1 (σj ) ⊆ N1 (CF(σj )). Now the argument
goes as in Lemma 2.4.38. Nesting these inclusions, for all pairs of indices 1 ≤ j <
j 0 ≤ η such that 2|(j 0 − j), we get
N(j 0 −j)/2 (CF(σj 0 )) ⊆ CF(σj ).
Denote η̂ := b(η − 1)/2c. If, for any α+ ∈ V (ρa+ ) ⊆ CF(σa2η̂ +1 ), α− ∈ V (ρa− ), we
have dX 0 (α− , α+ ) < η̂, then
α− ∈ Nη̂−1 (CF(σa2η̂ +1 )) ⊆ CF(σ3 ) ⊆ CF1 (σ1 ),
as a consequence of the inclusions proved above. Also, CF1 (σ1 ) ⊆ CF1 (ρa− ), due
to an argument already employed, based on the last statement of Lemma 2.2.29: fix
any ξ ∈ CF1 (σ1 ). Then there is a ω1 ∈ E(σ10 ) ⊆ F(σ1 ), where σ10 is a subtrack of σ1
that fills X 0 ; and ξ is carried by ω1 and traverses all branches of σ10 . By said Lemma,
there is a ω− ∈ E(ρ0a− ) ⊆ F(ρa− ), with ρ0a− a subtrack of ρa− filling X 0 , such that ω−
fully carries ω1 , which carries ξ; moreover ρ0a− fully carries σ10 so, by composition of
carrying maps, ξ will traverse in ω− all branches belonging to ρ0a− .
But α− ∈ CF1 (ρa− ) cannot be true because of Lemma 2.2.33. So dX 0 (α− , α+ ) ≥ η̂,
proving the claim of this step.
Step 3: Proof of the key claim for Proposition 2.4.33.
Write
X
d00δ (τa− , τa+ ) = [dX 0 (τa− , τa+ )]M +

[dY (τa− , τa+ )]M .

Y ⊂X 0 k-good w.r.t. δ
(k≥1)

The fact proved above the beginning of the present proof implies that the set of
the k-good subsurfaces for X 0 , k ≥ 1, can be partitioned into families: one for each
1 ≤ u ≤ η 0 , consisting of the good subsurfaces of Yu which are good with respect to
δu . So the above summation can be split accordingly. As for the first term instead,
from Step 2 we get that [dX 0 (τa− , τa+ )]M ≥ dX 0 (τa− , τa+ ) − M ≥ η/2 − 1 − M . So
P 0

η
00
d00δ (τa− , τa+ ) ≥
d
(τ
,
τ
)
+ η/2 − 1 − M
a
a
−
+
u=1 δu

P0
≥ ηu=1 1/2 + d00δu (τa− , τa+ ) − 3/2 − M
(where we are also using the fact that η ≤ η 0 ≤ η + 1). Now we apply the induction
hypothesis and get that, if r(u) is the length of the chain δu , the last expression is
0

≥

η
X

(1/2 + [r(u)/ĉ3 − ĉ4 ]0 ) − 3/2 − M,

u=1

140

where ĉ3 , ĉ4 are upper bounds for the constants c3 (Y ), c4 (Y ) over all topological types
of subsurfaces Y of X 0 ; and the notation [·]0 indicates that we consider this summand
only if it is positive. There will be a constant c0 (depending on X 0 ) such that 1/2 +
[r(u)/ĉ3 − ĉ4 ]0 ≥ 1/3 + c0 r(u), so the expression is
!
η0
η0
X
X
r(u) −3/2−M ≥ r−3/2−M.
r(u)−3/2−M ≥ min{1/3, c0 } η 0 +
≥ η 0 /3+c0
u=1

u=1

The last inequality is due to the following argument: the sequence δ consists
of the junction of the sequences, and elements, δ1 , δx1 , δ2 , . . . , δη , δxη , [δη+1 ] (the last
P0
sequence may not exist). So its length is r = η + ηu=1 r(u).
This concludes the proof of the key claim.



We now prove Proposition 2.4.33. Let δ = (δ1 := γt1 , . . . , δr := γtr ) be a chain
subsequence with maximal length of γ1 , . . . , γq as defined in the statement. Let r be
the length of this chain, and let X 0 be the subsurface of X (and S) filled by the curves
in δ. Then
r ≤ c3 (X 0 )d0P+ (X 0 ) (τk , τl ) + c4 (X 0 ) ≤ c3 (X 0 )d0P+ (X) (τk , τl ) + c4 (X 0 )
(d0P+ (X) is indeed a summation involving all summands already present in d0P+ (X 0 ) ).
Lemma 2.4.36 gives then

q ≤ ξ(X)r ≤ ξ(X) c3 (X 0 )d0P+ (X) (τk , τl ) + c4 (X 0 ) .
Let now c̃3 (S) := maxY ⊆S c3 (Y ),
ξ(S) = maxY ⊆S ξ(Y ) we have

c̃4 (S)

:=

maxY ⊆S c4 (Y ).

Since


q ≤ ξ(S) c̃3 (S)d0P+ (X) (τk , τl ) + c̃4 (S) .
which defines the required constants C3 (S), C4 (S). This completes the proof.

2.5

Untwisted sequences. Proof of the main statement

Note: Consistently with §2.4, we work in the setting of generic train tracks only.
This is not restrictive, however, since a semigeneric splitting sequence can always be
converted to a generic one, to which the main result (Theorem 2.5.19) applies.
In this section we will explain how to deprive a splitting sequence of a high number
of Dehn twist, and then we show that this sequence is suitable for application of the
same techniques of proof of quasi-geodicity as in [MMS12], Theorem 6.12.
141

2.5.1

The untwisted sequence

Definition 2.5.1. Let S be a surface, and let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic splitting
sequence of train tracks evolving firmly in a subsurface S 0 , not necessarily connected.
Let γ1 , . . . , γr ⊆ C(τ0 ) be curves all contained in S 0 , and suppose that τ is (γ1 , . . . , γr )arranged. In particular the sequence (max DIt )rt=1 is increasing.
Let mt := rotτ (γt ; DIt ) ≥ 2K0 + 4, let εt be the sign of γt as a twist curve in τ ,
and let gt := max DIt (0) − min DIt (0) be the ‘period length’ in the sequence DIt .
ε (2K +4−mt )
Define recursively φ0 := idS : S → S; and, for 1 ≤ t ≤ r, φt := Dγtt 0
◦φt−1 .
Let N I0 := [0, min DI1 ]; N It := [max DIt , min DIt+1 ] for 1 ≤ t ≤ r − 1; N Ir :=

[max DIr , N ]; DKt := DIt (0) ∪ . . . ∪ DIt (2K0 + 3) and DLt := DIt (mt − 2K0 − 4) ∪
. . . ∪ DIt (mt − 1) for 1 ≤ t ≤ r. Define the untwisting of τ as
Uτ := τ (N I0 )∗
∗ (φ1 · τ (DL1 )) ∗ (φ1 · τ (N I1 )) ∗
...
∗ (φr−1 · τ (DLr−1 )) ∗ (φr−1 · τ (N Ir−1 )) ∗
∗ (φr · τ (DLr )) ∗ (φr · τ (N Ir )) .
In the above notation, φt ·τ (. . .) means the splitting sequence obtained from τ (. . .)
via application of φt to all its entries.
0

0
If Uτ = (Uτj )N
j=0 , the above definition provides a natural subdivision of [0, N ]
into subintervals
U
N I0U , DI1U , N I2U , DI2U , . . . , N Ir−1
, DIrU , N IrU

where the maximum of each subinterval is the minimum of the following one. Each
interval DItU has twist nature with respect to φt (γt ), and may be subdivided into
DItU (0), . . . , DItU (2K0 + 3). For all 1 ≤ t ≤ r + 1, there is a natural bijection between
N It and N ItU ; and, if t 6= 0, between DIt (mt − 2K0 − 4 + s) and DItU (s) for all
0 ≤ s ≤ 2K0 + 3. In order to keep the employed notation simple, let DI0 = DI0U =
DK0 = DL0 = {0}. If j ∈ N It (resp. DLt ) let ↓j be the corresponding index in N ItU
(resp. DItU ). Extend ↓ : [0, N ] → [0, N 0 ] in the only way that gives a monotonic map.
For j 0 ∈ [0, N 0 ] let ↑j 0 be the least of the indices j ∈ [0, N ] such that ↓j = j 0 . Note
that there is always a t such that ↑j 0 ∈ DLt ∪ N It .
For j ∈ [0, N ], let t(j) be the least index t such that j ∈ DIt or j ∈ N It . For
j ∈ [0, N 0 ], let Ut(j 0 ) be the least index t such that j ∈ DItU or j ∈ N ItU . Then, for
S
all j ∈ rt=0 (DLt ∪ N It ), Uτ↓j = φt(j) (τj ); and for all j 0 ∈ [0, N 0 ], Uτj 0 = φU t(j 0 ) (τ↑j 0 ).
0

142

Anyway note that each interval DItU can be made to correspond not only to DLt ,
but to DKt as well: for all 1 ≤ t ≤ r, if j ∈ DKt , and j 0 := min DItU + (j − min DIt ),
then Uτj 0 = φt−1 (τj ). This means that, for all 0 ≤ t ≤ r − 1,
U
Uτ (DItU ∪ N ItU ∪ DIt+1
) = φt · τ (DLt ∪ N It ∪ DKt+1 ) .

Also, for 0 ≤ t ≤ r − 1, let [t]↓ : [0, N ] → [0, N 0 ] be defined as a correspondence
U
that exploits this identity: [t]↓j := j − min DKt+1 + min DKt+1
if j ∈ DKt+1 ; [t]↓j :=
U
max DIt+1 if j ∈ DIt+1 \ DKt+1 ; and [t]↓j := ↓j otherwise. With this correspondence,
Uτ[t]↓j = φt (τj ) for all j ∈ DLt ∪ N It ∪ DKt+1 .
Define also [t]↑ : [0, N 0 ] → [0, N ] by setting [t]↑j 0 to be the least j ∈ [0, N ] such
that [t]↓j = j 0 . Define [r]↓ := ↓ and [r]↑ := ↑.
U
For X ⊆ S a subsurface, denote IX
the accessible interval of X in Uτ .

Note: most of the time in this section we will deal with an arranged splitting
sequence τ and its respective untwisted sequence Uτ , as above. In order to simplify
notations for distances along these two splitting sequences we will adopt similar ones
as in [MMS12].
• If i, j ∈ [0, N ] and Y ⊆ S is a subsurface, dY (i, j) := dY (τi , τj ), and similarly
for dP+ (Y ) , d0P+ (Y ) and other distances in graphs. If I ⊆ [0, N ] is a subinterval,
dY (I) := dY (min I, max I) etc.
• If i, j ∈ [0, N 0 ] and X ⊆ S is a subsurface, dX (i, j)U := dX (Uτi , Uτj ), and
similarly for dP+ (X) (. . . , . . .)U , d0P+ (X) (. . . , . . .)U and other distances in graphs.
If I ⊆ [0, N ] is a subinterval, dY (I)U := dY (min I, max I)U etc.
In a bit we will need a version of untwisting for train track splitting sequences
which do not evolve firmly in any subsurface of X. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic splitting sequence of cornered birecurrent train tracks: τ can be seen as a concatenation
τ 1 ∗ε2 ∗τ 2 ∗. . .∗εw ∗τ w where each τ i evolves firmly in a fixed subsurface of S and each
εu is a single split, say from a track τj to τj+1 , such that V (τj ) fills a surface strictly
and essentially containing the one filled by τj+1 — thus the complexity of the former
is higher than the one of the latter. This decomposition is possible because, as it has
been pointed out after Lemma 2.2.11, the subsurfaces filled by V (τj ), for 0 ≤ j ≤ N ,
are a decreasing family with respect to the inclusion. Moreover, the number w ≤ ξ(S);
and the single split in each εu may induce at most dP+ (X) (Rτj , Rτj+1 ) ≤ 1.
Definition 2.5.2. For τ as above, we define
Rτ := Rτ 1 ∗ ε1 ∗ Rτ 2 ∗ . . . ∗ εw−1 ∗ Rτ w .

143

u
Suppose now that each τ u in the subdivision above is (γ1u , . . . , γr(u)
)-arranged for

a suitable family of curves. The construction of each Uτ u as in Definition 2.5.1 above
would give, in particular, a diffeomorphism φur(u) : S → S (called simply φr there);
and we denote here ψu+1 := φur(u) ◦ . . . ◦ φ1r(1) for all 1 ≤ u ≤ w − 1; while ψ1 := idS .
Let then
Uτ := Uτ 1 ∗


∗ ψ2 · ε2 ∗ ψ2 · Uτ 2 ∗
...


∗ ψw−1 · εw−1 ∗ ψw−1 · Uτ w−1 ∗
∗ (ψw · εw ) ∗ (ψw · Uτ w ) .
Lemma 2.5.3 (Unbroken accessible intervals). Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a (γ1 , . . . , γr )arranged train track splitting sequence, evolving firmly in a subsurface S 0 , not necessarily connected. Let X ⊆ S 0 be a subsurface of S. Then the following properties
hold.
1. If γt cuts ∂X, then DIt 6⊆ IX ; more precisely, DIt ∩ IX contains at most 2gt
indices;
2. If γt does not cut ∂X, then either DIt ⊆ IX or DIt ∩ IX = ∅.
3. Let t− := t(min IX ); let t+ be the highest t such that max IX ≥ max DIt , and
suppose that there is no t with IX ( DIt . Then, for all t− ≤ t ≤ t+ , φ−1
t ◦ φt−
fixes X and each component of ∂X, up to isotopies of S.
4. In the setting specified above, [t+ ]↓IX = IφUt (X) .
−
U
U
≥ max DItU ,
5. Let Ut− := Ut(min IX
); let Ut+ be the highest t such that max IX
U
and suppose that there is no t with IX
( DItU . Then

Iφ−1

U t−

(X)



U
= [Ut+ ]↑ min IX
, max DIU t+ or Iφ−1

U t−

(X)



U
U
= [Ut+ ]↑ min IX
, [Ut+ ]↑ max IX

U
depending on whether max IX
= max DIUUt+ or not.
6. If X is not an annulus, γt does not intersect X essentially, and j, j +gt ∈ DIt ⊆

IX , then τj |X = τj+gt |X (up to isotopy).
S1
7. If tt=t
(DIt ∪ N It ) ⊆ (DIt0 ∪ N It0 ) ∪ IX , and γt does not intersect X for
0
t0 + 1 ≤ t ≤ t1 , then all the respective maps φt ◦ φ−1
t0 have their restriction to
φt0 (X) isotopic to the inclusion φt0 (X) ,→ S; and all the φ̂t : S X → S φt (X) =
S φt0 (X) , lift of the respective φt , are isotopic to φ̂t0 .
S1
As a consequence, Uτ↓j |φt0 (X) = φ̂t0 (τj |X) for all j ∈ tt=t
(DIt ∪ N It ). If, in
0

St1
addition, there is an interval I ⊆ IX such that I ⊆
(DI
∪
N
I
)
∪DKt1 +1
t
t
t=t0
144

(setting DKr+1 = {N } for simplicity), then Uτ[t1 ]↓j |φt0 (X) = φ̂t0 (τj |X) for all
j ∈ I.
Proof. When X is an annulus, claim 1 is a direct consequence of Lemma 2.4.28,
according to which one must have rotτ (γt ; DIt ∩ IX ) = 0. For X not an annulus, suppose for a contradiction that # (DIt ∩ IX ) ≥ 2gt + 1, which means that
there are two indices k, l ∈ DIt ∩ IX such that τl = Dγ2εt t (τk ). Since k, l ∈ IX ,
C(τk |X), C(τl |X) both have diameter ≥ 3 in C(X), so they fill X, and both sets
must include a curve which essentially intersects γt in S, as γt essentially intersects
X: i.e. πNt C(τk |X), πNt C(τl |X) 6= ∅ where Nt is a regular neighbourhood of γt .
From Theorem 2.3.2 and the subsequent remark, we know that any efficient position for ∂X in τk or τl is wide. Therefore, when lifting an efficiently positioned ∂X
to S Nt , it will not traverse the same branch of τkNt , or of τlNt , twice in the same verse.
εt
· V (τkNt ), for DNt denoting the Dehn
We claim that πNt C(τk |X) ⊆ V (τkNt ) ∪ DN
t

twist in S Nt about its core. It is certainly true, to start with, that πNt C(τk |X) ⊆

εt i
Nt
C(τkNt ); if there is an α ∈ πNt C(τk |X) ∩ DN
·
V
(τ
)
for i 6= 0, 1, then i > 1 by
k
t
Lemma 2.4.18, implying that α, when embedded in τkNt , traverses thrice a branch b
contained in τkNt .γt (see point 3 after Definition 2.4.17). Now, α shall be essentially
disjoint from all components of πNt (∂X): but then, any component of πNt (∂X),
assuming ∂X in efficient position, shall traverse b at least twice; and this contradicts
the fact that it is wide.
2εt
· C(τkNt ) =
However, C(τlNt ) ⊆ DN
t

S∞

i=2

εt i
DN
· V (τkNt ) and this, together with
t

the fact just proved, implies in particular πNt C(τk |X) ∩ πNt C(τl |X) = ∅. On the
other hand πNt C(τl |X) ⊆ πNt C(τk |X) because τk |X carries τl |X, and they are both
nonempty. This is a contradiction.
As for claim 2: let now [k, l] := DIt , so that τl = Dγεtt mt (τk ). There is a lift
D̂ : S X → S X of Dγεtt mt which fixes X and each component ∂X up to isotopy in S X .
So τlX = D̂(τkX ) and C(τlX ) = D̂ · C(τkX ), yielding that also τl |X = D̂(τk |X).
Now, when X is an annulus, j ∈ IX means that τj |X is combed, i.e. its core γ is a
twist curve of τj (Lemma 2.4.6); and it is clear from the above that γ is a twist curve
for τk if and only if it is one for τl = Dγεtt mt (τk ) and for all tracks in between, proving
the claim in this case. When X is not an annulus, C(τl |X) = D̂εt mt · C(τk |X) and
C∗ (τl |X) = D̂εt mt · C∗ (τk |X). So the sets C(τk |X), C(τl |X) have the same diameter
in C(X), and the same is true of C∗ (τk |X), C∗ (τl |X). Again, this means that k ∈ IX
if and only if l ∈ IX .
For claim 3 note, first of all, that it were t− > t+ then max DIt− > max IX
leading to IX ( DIt− , contradicting the hypothesis. Then t− ≤ t+ . The claim
145

is proved if one proves that, for each t− ≤ t < t + 1 ≤ t+ , the diffeomorphism
−ε

t+1
φ−1
t+1 ◦ φt = Dγt+1

(2K0 +4−mt+1 )

fixes X and and each component of ∂X, up to isotopies

of S. For this value of t, min DIt+1 ≥ min IX and max DIt+1 ≤ max IX , so claims 1
and 2 apply, and imply that Dγt+1 fixes X and each of the connected components of
∂X (again, up to isotopies of S): the same is true of any power of it.
To prove claim 4: let IX = [k, l]. Suppose first that X is not an annulus.
Note that if t+ < r then, from claims 1 and 2 above, it can be derived that not
only l < max DIt+ +1 , but also l < max DKt+ +1 . Therefore (even for t+ = r), if
j ∈ IX then j 0 := [t+ ]↓j has the property that Uτj 0 = φt (τj ) for a suitable t− ≤
t ≤ t+ : this is a consequence of the basic remarks and definitions given above. So
diamC(φt (X)) (C(Uτj 0 |φt (X)), diamC(φt (X)) (C∗ (Uτj 0 |φt (X)) ≥ 3 just by application of
φt to τj . But it has been just proved above that, for the considered values of t,
φt (X) = φt− (X). This yields j 0 ∈ IφUt

− (X)

i.e. one inclusion is proved for X not an

annulus.
For the opposite inclusion, suppose l < N : this implies that, if t+ < r, then l+1 ≤
max DKt+ +1 . Thus (even for t+ = r) not only Uτ[t+ ]↓l = φt+ (τl ), but also Uτ[t+ ]↓(l+1) =

φt+ (τl+1 ). Since diamC(X) (C(τl+1 |X)) < 3, also diamC(φt+ (X)) C(Uτ[t+ ]↓(l+1) |φt+ (X)) <
3. As φt+ (X) = φt− (X), this yields [t+ ]↓(l + 1) 6∈ IφUt

− (X)

.

Similarly, suppose that k > 0: then k − 1 ≥ min DIt− , thus Uτ[t+ ]↓k = φt− (τk ) and
Since diamC(X) (C∗ (τk−1 |X))
<
3, also
Uτ[t+ ]↓(k−1)
=
φt− (τk−1 ).

∗
diamC(φt− (X)) C (Uτ[t+ ]↓(k−1) |φt− (X)) < 3, and this means that [t+ ]↓(k − 1) 6∈
IφUt

− (X)

. To sum up, considering that the cases l = N or k = 0 are trivial, IφUt

− (X)

⊆

[t+ ]↓IX .
If X is an annulus a similar argument applies: but, rather than looking at the
preservation of the diameter of the considered sets under the respective diffeomorphisms, the preserved property is whether the core curve of X, which turns into the
core of φt− (X), is twist.
In order to prove claim 5, note that similarly as above one has Ut− ≤ Ut+ . Let
U
k := [Ut− ]↑(min IX
), and let Y := φ−1
U t− (X). Necessarily k ∈ IY , since [Ut− ]↓k =
U
min IX
and Uτmin IXU = φU t− (τk ). Suppose there is a t such that IY ( DIt . There are

two cases to discern.
If k = max N IU t− = min DIU t− +1 , then t = Ut− + 1 and max IY < max DIt ;
also max IY < max DKt by claim 1. But then Uτmax DIt = φU t− (τmax DKt ) implying,
with arguments similar to the ones already seen above, that max DItU and so that


IX ⊆ [Ut− ]↓k, max DItU − 1 . But necessarily ↓k = min DItU resulting in IX ( DItU ,
a contradiction.
146

If k is any other index, then t = Ut− , and min DIt 6∈ IY . This implies, by
U
U
definition of k as [Ut+ ]↑(min IX
), which by t− ≤ t+ is the same as ↑(min IX
), that

k ∈ DLt , k 6= min DLt . Either max DIt = N , or max DIt + 1 6∈ IY and Uτmax DItU +1 =
φU t− (τmax DIt +1 ). Both scenarios imply max IX ≤ max DItU , but on the other hand
also min IX = [Ut+ ]↓k > min DItU by assumption. Hence the same contradiction as
above: IX ( DItU .
Therefore there is no t with IY ( DIt and claim 4 applies: IX = [Ut+ ]↓IY . Now
if, for any fixed value of t, IY ⊇ DKt or DLt , then IY ⊇ DIt , by claims 1 and 2
above. This completes the proof of the claim.
In claim 6, note that τj+gt = Dγεtt (τj ). Since γt does not intersect X essentially,
Dγt |X : X → S is isotopic to the inclusion map X ,→ S. The map has a lift
D̂ : S X → S X whose restriction to X = core(S X ) is again isotopic to the inclusion
X
= D̂(τjX ) are
map. This means that D̂ is itself isotopic to idS X . Hence τjX , τj+g
t
pretracks isotopic in S, and τj |X,τj+gt |X are, too.
For the first statement in claim 7, note that φt ◦φ−1
t0 is a number of Dehn twist about
curves essentially disjoint from X, so it follows as an application of what has been said
S1
previously. As for the second statement, we know that for all j ∈ tt=t
(DIt ∪ N It ) we
0
St1
have Uτ↓j = φt(j) (τj ) and ↓j = [t1 ]↓j while, for all j ∈ I \ t=t0 (DIt ∪ N It ) ⊆ DKt1 +1 ,
we have Uτ[t1 ]↓j = φt1 (τj ). Lifting, we find that Uτ↓j |φt(j) (X) = φ̂t(j) (τj |X) and
Uτ[t1 ]↓j |φt1 (X) = φ̂t1 (τj |X), respectively, in the two specified cases; but φt(j) (X) and
φt1 (X) are isotopic to φt0 (X) in both scenarios.

Remark 2.5.4. There is a constant C20 = C20 (S) such that the following are true. In
the setting of the above lemma, for X not an annulus, suppose that γt cuts ∂X essentially, and let k, l

∈

DIt ∩ IX .

Then dP+ (X) (τk |X, τl |X)

≤

C20 , and

dY (V (τk |X), V (τl |X)) ≤ C20 for all Y ⊆ X non-annular subsurfaces. Incidentally,
it has been already noted in the remark after Lemma 2.2.11 that V (τk |X), V (τl |X)
are both vertices of P+ (X).
Note: the constants C2 , C20 will be merged into a single one C2 after the present
remark.
A straightforward consequence of claim 1 in the above lemma is that rotτ (γt ; k, l) ≤
2 so, by Lemma 2.4.22, at most 5N32 splits — which are all twist ones about γt —
occur in τ (k, l). A combinatorial finiteness argument, entirely similar to the one in
the proof of Lemma 2.4.34, gives an upper bound K, depending on S only, for i(α, β)
where α ∈ V (τk ) and β ∈ V (τl ).
For each Y ⊆ X non-annular subsurface, πY V (τk ), πY V (τl ) are both nonempty;
and the intersection number between any pair of elements, one from each set, is not
147

greater than 4K + 4 (Remark 1.2.5). Hence there is a bound on dY (V (τk ), V (τl ))
(Lemma 1.2.4), and one on dP+ (X) (V (τk ), V (τl )) (Theorem 1.2.9, Lemma 1.2.12).
Lemma 2.2.13 commutes these bounds into ones for the required distances.
Corollary 2.5.5. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a (γ1 , . . . , γr )-arranged train track splitting sequence, evolving firmly in a subsurface S 0 , not necessarily connected, of S. Let Σ1 (τ )
be the family of all connected components of S 0 , and let Σ2 (τ ) be the family of all (isotopy classes of ) subsurfaces X ⊆ S 0 of S such that IX is not empty and not strictly
contained in a single DIt , 1 ≤ t ≤ r. Define Σ1 (Uτ ) = Σ1 (τ ), and Σ2 (Uτ ) similarly
as above (adding superscripts U ).
Also let Σ(τ ) := Σ1 (τ ) ∪ Σ2 (τ ) and Σ(Uτ ) := Σ1 (Uτ ) ∪ Σ2 (Uτ ).
For each X ∈ Σ2 (τ ), let φX := φt− for t− = t− (X) defined as in claim 3 of Lemma
2.5.3 above.
Then the map Σ(τ ) → Σ(Uτ ), defined by X 7→ UX := X for X ∈ Σ1 (S), and by
X 7→ UX := φX (X) (up to isotopies in S) for X ∈ Σ2 (S), is a bijection.
Proof. The two definitions are easily seen to agree for X ∈ Σ1 (τ ) ∩ Σ2 (τ ). Also,
the fact that the map is bijective easily follows from its restriction Σ2 (τ ) → Σ2 (Uτ )
being so.
We first prove injectivity. Given X1 , X2 ∈ Σ2 (τ ), they may have:
• t− (X1 ) = t− (X2 ). In this case φX1 = φX2 ; so UX1 , UX2 are isotopic surfaces if
and only if X1 , X2 are.
• t− (X1 ) < t− (X2 ) (without loss of generality). In this case ↓(min IX1 ) < ↓(min IX2 )
U
U
so IX
= [t+ (X1 )]↓IX1 6= [t+ (X2 )]↓IX2 = IX
. This implies, in particular, X1 , X2
1
2

not isotopic in S.
Surjectivity is a straightforward consequence of claim 5 in the lemma above.



Note that, in particular, all regular neighbourhoods of curves N (γt ) ∈ Σ(τ ),
so there is a bijection between the family N (γ1 ), . . . , N (γr ) and the corresponding
U (N (γ1 )) , . . . , U (N (γr )). This means, in particular, that their core curves Uγ1 :=
φN (γ1 ) (γ1 ), . . . , Uγr := φN (γr ) (γr ) are all distinct, meaning that Uτ is (Uγ1 , . . . , Uγr )arranged and that U(Uτ ) = Uτ .
Proposition 2.5.6. Let S be a surface. There is a constant C5 (S) such that the
following is true.
Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a (γ1 , . . . , γr )-arranged splitting sequence, evolving firmly in a
subsurface S 0 , not necessarily connected, of S. Let X ∈ Σ(τ ), X not an annulus, and

148

let [k, l] be an interval of indices for τ , with the condition that [k, l] ⊆ IX if X is not
a connected component of S 0 . Then
2
2
dP+ (U X) (↓k, ↓l)U ≤ C5 dP+ (X) (k, l) and dP+ (X) (k, l) ≤ C5 dP+ (U X) (↓k, ↓l)U .
There are two increasing functions ΨS , Ψ0S : [0, +∞) → [0, +∞) such that, if
γ1 , . . . , γr are the effective twist curves of τ and τ is effectively arranged, then


dM+ (U X) (↓k, ↓l)U ≤ ΨS dP+ (U X) (↓k, ↓l)U ≤ Ψ0S dP+ (X) (k, l) .
Proof. Step 1: preparation.
The curves γ1 , . . . , γr come with the usual condition that (min DIt )t is an increasing sequence. Let 1 ≤ t1 < . . . < tq ≤ r be the indices such that DIts ∩ [k, l] 6= ∅ and
γt is essentially not disjoint from X. So each of these γts may be essentially contained
in X or intersect ∂X essentially; but, according to claims 1 and 2 in Lemma 2.5.3,
the latter case may occur only for s = 1, q because all the other DIts ⊆ [k, l].
We establish a parallel notation for intervals of indices of τ , one that resembles
the one used so far but focuses only on X and on the family γt1 , . . . , γtq . First
of all rename these curves as δ1 , . . . , δq . Then, for s = 1, . . . , q, denote XDIs :=
DIts ∩ [k, l], and XDLs := DLts ∩ [k, l]. For s = 1, . . . , q − 1, moreover, define
XN Is := [max XDIs , min XDIs+1 ]. Define also XN I0 := [k, min XDI1 ], XN Iq :=
[max XDIq , l]. Each XN Is is a union of intervals N It , and of intervals DIt for some
γt not intersecting X essentially. In order to improve compatibility with the formulas,
let also XDI0 := XDL0 := {k}.
We define also intervals related to the sequence Uτ : XDIsU := ↓XDIs for all
s = 1, . . . , q, XN IsU := ↓XN Is for all s = 0, . . . , q.
The collection V (τl |X) is a vertex of P+ (X): if X is strictly contained in a
connected component of S 0 , this derives from the hypothesis l ∈ IX . Otherwise
we know from Lemma 2.2.11 that V (τl |X) consists of all elements of V (τl ) which are
essentially contained in X and not isotopic to connected components of ∂X: these
elements fill X and abide by the mutual intersection bound established in accordance
with Remark 2.1.26.
Now, τ is, in particular, (δ1 , . . . , δq )-arranged: so, by Proposition 2.4.33, simplifying its statement, there is a bound q ≤ c · dP+ (X) (k, l) for a c = c(S). On the other
hand: Uτ is (Uγt1 , . . . , Uγtq )-arranged; these curves are all contained in UX except
for possibly Uγt1 , Uγtq ; and either ↓l ∈ IUUX or UX = X is a connected component
of S 0 . This implies that V (Uτ↓l |UX) is a vertex of P+ (UX) so, again according to
Proposition 2.4.33, it is also true that q ≤ c · dP+ (X) (↓k, ↓l)U .
149

Denote, for simplicity, t0 := 0 and tq+1 := r + 1. The following argument is
straightforward if we are working on X ∈ Σ1 (τ ), and is motivated by claim 7 in
Lemma 2.5.3 if X ∈ Σ2 (τ ). For 0 ≤ s ≤ q, if ts ≤ t < ts+1 then φt |X = φts |X ;
also, if φ̂t : S X → S φt (X) is the lift of φt , then the sequence (Uτj |UX)j∈XDIsU ∪XN IsU
is obtained from (τj |X)j∈XDLs ∪XN Is applying φ̂ts to each entry, and removing some
repetitions of tracks in the Dehn intervals DIt ⊂ XN Is , where γt does not intersect
X essentially. So dP+ (U X) (XDIsU ∪ XN IsU )U = dP+ (X) (XDLs ∪ XN Is ).
Step 2: reciprocal bounds for distances in the pants graph.
Fix an index s, and denote simply a := min XDLs ; b := max XDIs ; φ :=
φt(min XDLs ) . Take R0 = maxY ⊆S subsurface R0 (Y, Q), for Q the quasi-isometry constant introduced in Theorem 2.3.5, as defined in Lemma 1.2.7. By those theorem
and lemma, we have that for any non-annular subsurface Y ⊆ X, dY (τa |X, τb |X) ≤
dY (τk |X, τl |X) + 2R0 .
Let M 0 = M + 2R0 — for the definition of M , see the beginning of §2.4.5 — we
have
X

X

[dY (τa |X, τb |X)]M 0 =

([dY (τk |X, τl |X)]M + r(Y ))

Y ⊂X essential
and non-annular

Y ⊂X essential
and non-annular

where r(Y ) = 2R0 if it comes alongside a nonzero summand, and 0 otherwise. So
0

[dY (τk , τl )]M + r(Y ) ≤ M
[dY (τk |X, τl |X)]M . Therefore, by Theorem 1.2.9 and Lemma
M
1.2.12 there are constants c0 , c1 depending on S (and M ) such that dP+ (X) (τa , τb ) ≤
c0 dP+ (X) (τk , τl ) + c1 .
Similarly, we get dP+ (U X) (Uτ↓a , Uτ↓b ) ≤ c0 dP+ (U X) (Uτ↓k , Uτ↓l ) + c1 .
So, on the one hand,
dP+ (U X) (↓k, ↓l)U ≤
Pq

s=0

Pq

s=0

dP+ (U X) (XDIsU ∪ XN IsU )U =

dP+ (X) (XDLs ∪ XN Is ) ≤ (q + 1) c0 dP+ (X) (k, l) + c1



and, as already pointed out, q ≤ c · dP+ (X) (k, l). This, together the considerations at
the beginning of §2.4.5, proves the existence of a C5 (S) such that dP+ (U X) (↓k, ↓l)U ≤
2
C5 dP+ (X) (k, l) .
On the other hand,
dP+ (X) (k, l) ≤

Pq

s=0


dP+ (X) (min XDIs , min XDLs ) + dP+ (X) (XDLs ∪ XN Is ) .

For s = 1, . . . , q (neglect the dummy index s = 0), τ (min XDIs , min XDLs ) has
twist nature about δs which is either contained in X or cutting ∂X essentially. So
150

the sequence falls in the kind treated in either the last bullet of Lemma 2.4.34, or
Remark 2.5.4, implying that dP+ (X) (min XDIs , min XDLs ) ≤ C2 (S). Continuing the
chain of inequalities:
... ≤

Pq


C2 + c0 dP+ (U X) (XDIsU ∪ XN IsU )U + c1 ≤

≤ (q + 1) C2 + c0 dP+ (U X) (↓k, ↓l)U + c1

s=0

Again as already pointed out, q ≤ c·dP+ (U X) (↓k, ↓l)U therefore C5 (S) can be taken
2
so that dP+ (X) (k, l) ≤ C5 dP+ (U X) (↓k, ↓l)U .
Step 3: bounds for distances in annular subsurfaces, when τ is effectively arranged.
Let α ∈ C(X) be a curve and, for ease of notation, let simply N = N (α) be a regular neighbourhood of α in X. We wish to prove the existence of constants depending
on S such that, for all 0 ≤ s ≤ q, and all j, j 0 ∈ XDLs ∪ XN Is , dN (τj |X, τj 0 |X) is

bounded by this constant. Note that each V (τj |X)N is a subset of the respective
V (τjN ).
• If α is none of the δs then, as it follows immediately from the definition of effective twist curve, dN (τ0 |X, τN |X) < 4K0 +19; and consequently, dN (τj |X, τj 0 |X) <
4K0 + 2R0 + 19.
• If α = δu for u 6= s, then [j, j 0 ] ⊆ Gtu − ∪ Itu − or [j, j 0 ] ⊆ Itu + ∪ Gtu + — see
Definition 2.4.31. The first case implies that dN (τj |X, τj 0 |X) ≤ K0 + 2R0 + 9,
and the second one that dN (τj |X, τj 0 |X) ≤ K0 + 6.
• If α = δs then [j, j 0 ] ⊆ DLs ∪ Is+ ∪ Gs+ . If [j, j 0 ] ⊆ DLs then rotτ (δs ; j, j 0 ) ≤
2K0 + 4 hence dN (τj |X, τj0 |X) ≤ 2K0 + 8 by point 7 in Remark 2.4.20. If
[j, j 0 ] ⊆ Is+ ∪ Gs+ then same as above applies, and if j, j 0 range in the union
of the three intervals then dN (τj |X, τj 0 |X) is bounded by the sum of the two
previous bounds.
This proves the existence of the desired bound, which we call c0 . As for the
splitting sequence Uτ , let α ∈ C(UX).
Fix a value 0 ≤ s ≤ q, and recall the conclusions of Step 1. If ts ≤ t <
ts+1 then φt |X = φts |X and in particular there is a curve βs ∈ C(X) such that
ˆ
φt (βs ) = φts (βs ) = α. If φ̂t : S N (βs ) → S N (α) is the lift of φt , then the se

quence (Uτj |X)N (α) j∈XDI U ∪XN I U is obtained from (Uτj |X)N (βs ) j∈XDLs ∪XN Is aps
s
ˆ
plying φ̂ts (min XDLs ) to each entry, and removing some repetitions of entries in the
intervals DIt ⊂ XN Is , where γt does not intersect X essentially. So if [a, b] =
XDLs ∪ XN Is then [↓a, ↓b] = XDIsU ∪ XN IsU and dN (α) (Uτ↓a |UX, Uτ↓b |UX) =
dN (βs ) (τa |X, τb |X) ≤ c0 .
151

Step 4: bound for dM+ (U X) (k, l)U , when τ is effectively arranged.
The

distance

bounds

seen

above

prove

immediately

that

dN (α) (Uτ↓k |UX, τ↓l |UX) ≤ c0 (q + 1) for all α ∈ C(UX).
Let then M 00 := max{M, c0 (q + 1) + 1}. We have
X
X
[dY (Uτ↓k |X, τ↓l |X)]M 00 =
[dY (Uτ↓k |X, τ↓l |X)]M 00
Y ⊂U X essential

Y ⊂U X essential
and non-annular

and this implies, via the usual Theorem 1.2.9 and Lemma 1.2.12, that
dM+ (U X) (↓k, ↓l)U ≤ f0 dP+ (U X) (↓k, ↓l)U + f1 . Here, f0 and f1 derive from e0 , e1 cited
in Theorem 1.2.9 and may be supposed, by taking looser bounds, to depend on S and
M 00 only, and be increasing functions in the variable M 00 .
Using a simplified notation dU := dP+ (U X) (↓k, ↓l)U and d := dP+ (X) (k, l):
dM+ (U X) (↓k, ↓l)U ≤ f0 (S, c00 dU ) dU + f1 (S, c00 dU )
≤ C5 f0 (S, c00 C5 d2 ) d2 + f1 (S, c00 C5 d2 )
where c00 is a further constant, deriving from the previous ones c, c0 ; and we are using
the fact that q ≤ cdU , dU ≤ d2 . This proves our claim.

2.5.2



Proof of the main statement

In this subsection we prove Theorem 2.3.1.
Definition 2.5.7. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a splitting sequence of birecurrent train tracks
on S, and let X ⊆ S be a non-annular subsurface. Let 0 ≤ j < N be an index such
that τj splits to τj+1 . We say that this split move is visible in X if, in order to turn
τj |X into τj+1 |X, a split is required (i.e. it does not suffice to apply comb equivalences
and/or take subtracks).
We denote with |τ |X the number of splits in τ which are visible in X.
Paraphrasing the statement of Theorem 2.3.1, we want to show that the distance
induced in the pants graph by a splitting sequence is, up to constants, the number of
splits in the untwisted sequence: this is easy in one direction.
Proposition 2.5.8. There is a constant C6 = C6 (S) such that the following is true.
Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic splitting sequence of recurrent, cornered train tracks on
S. Let X be a subsurface of S with X ⊇ S 0 the subsurface, not necessarily connected,
filled by V (τ0 ), and suppose that V (τN ) is a vertex of P+ (S). Then
dP+ (X) (τ0 , τN ) ≤ C6 |U(Rτ )|.
152

Proof. Suppose first that τ evolves firmly in a (possibly disconnected) subsurface S 0 .
0

N
Define a strictly increasing sequence of indices (ji )K
i=0 for the sequence Rτ = (Rτj )j=0

such that one of the following holds — using the standard notation of Definition 2.4.31
and of Proposition 2.4.32.
• [ji , ji+1 ] = DIsR , or consists of DIsR plus some slide moves, for some s; in this
case dP+ (S) (Rτij , Rτij+1 ) ≤ C2 by Lemma 2.4.34.
• [ji , ji+1 ]∩DIsR is not more than a single index for each s, and there is exactly one
split move in (Rτ )(ji , ji+1 ). Then dP+ (S) (Rτij , Rτij+1 ) ≤ 1 by the choice of para
meters in Remark 2.1.26 and, in particular, i V (Rτij ), V (Rτij+1 ) ≤ `. This


bounds uniformly i πY V (Rτij ), πY V (Rτij+1 ) and then dY Rτij |X, Rτij+1 |X ,
for each non-annular subsurface Y ⊆ X (with an application of Remark 1.2.5,
Lemma 1.2.4, Lemma 2.2.13 successively). Theorem 1.2.9 with Lemma 1.2.12,
then, gives a uniform bound C6 for dP+ (X) (Rτij , Rτij+1 ). Suppose C6 ≥ C2 , in
order to make notation simpler in the following chain of inequalities.
Now, |U(Rτ )| ≥ K ≥ dP+ (S) (Rτ0 , RτN 0 )/C6 . The second inequality follows directly from concatenating the ones above, while the first one is due to the fact that
each (U(Rτ )) (↓ji , ↓ji+1 ) contains at least one split. This proves the claim in the
specified special case.
More generally, view τ as a concatenation τ 1 ∗ ε1 ∗ τ 2 ∗ . . . ∗ εw−1 ∗ τ w as pointed
out just before Definition 2.5.2. For each 1 ≤ u ≤ w, let J u be the interval of indices
for τ coming from τ u . So
|U(Rτ )| =

Pw

u=1

(|ψu · U(Rτ u )| + 1) − 1 ≥

Pw


dP+ (X) (ψu (Rτmin J u )|X, ψu (Rτmax J u |X)) /C6 + 1 − 1 =

dP+ (X) (Rτmin J u |X, Rτmax J u |X) /C6 + 1 − 1 ≥ dP+ (X) (Rτ0 |X, RτN 0 |X)/C6
u=1

Pw

u=1

using the special case proved above combined with the triangle inequality.



We state Claim 6.14 from [MMS12] in a slightly more general setting:
Lemma 2.5.9. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a splitting sequence of birecurrent train tracks on
S, and let X ⊆ S be a subsurface. Then there is a constant N4 = N4 (X) such that,
if V (τk |X) = V (τl |X), then |τ (k, l)|X ≤ N4 .
The proof is the same as the original claim: in that setting, the splitting sequence
had some more properties than in the above statement, but they are not actually
employed.

153

Proposition 2.5.10. There is a constant C7 (S) such that the following is true. Let
τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic splitting sequence of birecurrent, cornered train tracks, which
evolves firmly in a subsurface S 0 of S, not necessarily connected; then, for each nonannular connected component T of S 0 ,
dP+ (T ) (V (τ0 ), V (τN )) ≥C7 |U(Rτ )|T .
The proof of this statement will be very similar to the one of Theorem 6.1 in
[MMS12], quoted in this work as Theorem 2.3.6. Large portions of our proof, actually,
would be verbatim repetitions of pieces of the proof of the mentioned result, up to a
replacement of a few names of objects.
The original splitting sequence τ is never needed in this proof: so we may well
identify Rτ = τ and, in particular, suppose that τ is effectively arranged. Index
0

Uτ = (Uτj )N
j=0 . In this proof, in order to avoid introducing ad hoc notations and
arguments, when T is a connected component of S 0 redefine IT := [0, N ] and ITU :=
[0, N 0 ].
If X ∈ Σ(τ ) is not an annulus and [p, q] = I ⊂ IX , let TX (p, q) = TX (I) be the set
of indices ↓p ≤ j ≤ (↓q) − 1 (in particular j ∈ ↓I ⊆ IUUX ) such that Uτj+1 is obtained
from Uτj via a split which is visible in UX. Note that for X 6= T Theorem 2.3.2
holds, and yields that in this case only one split is required.
The main step in our proof is a tailored version of Proposition 6.9 from [MMS12],
to be proved by induction on the complexity of subsurfaces of S 0 . We will refer to it
as the key claim:
Let X ∈ Σ(τ ). There is a constant C7 (X, S) such that for any JX ⊂ IX we have
|TX (JX )| ≤C7 dP+ (X) (JX ).
Proposition 2.5.10 will then follow taking X = T and JT = [0, N ].
Before we start the proof, we make some observations. First of all, there is a
difference between our hypotheses and the ones of [MMS12]: the latter include the
request that the vertex cycles of each entry in τ fill the entire surface, whereas here
we restrict to a connected component of the subsurface S 0 they fill.
The proof of our result, just as the one given in [MMS12], works by induction on
ξ(X). In general, however, our argument will exclude annular subsurfaces while they
are explicitly considered in [MMS12]. In particular, annuli cannot serve as an induction basis: this role will be covered by those subsurfaces which are homeomorphic to
S0,4 or S1,1 ; but it is not necessary to distinguish the induction basis from the rest.
154

It is worth noting that the re-definition of IT given above invalidates Theorem 2.3.2.
This causes no harm, since that theorem, during the present proof, will be used only
on proper subsurfaces of the X fixed in the above claim. The statements of Lemma
2.5.3 are still true with the new definition instead, and their proofs are either easier
or trivial.
To start the proof, fix two constants T0 (X), T1 (X) with the following conditions:
max{6K1 + 2K2 + 2K0 (X) + 2, 2R0 , M6 (X),
C2 + 2F (32N1 (S X ) + 4) + 2K0 (X) + 1} ≤ T0 (X)
max{T0 (X) + 2R0 ,

N1 K2 + C2 + 2F 8N1 (S X ) + 2K0 } ≤ T1 (X)
Here, K1 is the constant denoted N1 in [MMS12]: an upper bound for dY (α, β),
for Y a subsurface of S and α, β wide curves for one same almost track on S. Its
existence is proved with a bound on i(πY (α), πY (β)), similarly as in Lemma 2.2.13
and Remark 1.2.5. K2 is the constant denoted N2 in [MMS12]: an upper bound for
dY (V (τ |Z), V (τ 0 |Z)), where Y, Z are subsurfaces of S; τ, τ 0 are almost tracks with the
latter obtained from the former as a subtrack, or with a split. K2 exists again by a
similar argument as in Lemma 2.2.13. Again we take R0 = maxY ⊆S subsurface R0 (Y, Q),
for Q the quasi-isometry constant introduced in Theorem 2.3.5, as defined in Lemma
1.2.7.
The constant M6 (X) is introduced in Theorem 6.12 of [MM00], also stated as
Theorem 1.2.9 here, in the light of §8 in that work, which allows to ignore annular
subsurfaces. Finally, C2 has been defined in Lemma 2.4.34 and re-defined in Remark
2.5.4; N1 is defined in Lemma 2.1.18; F is the function introduced in Lemma 2.2.13.
Definition 2.5.11. A proper, non-annular subsurface Y ( X is an inductive subsurface
if dY (JX ) ≥ T0 (X). The related inductive subinterval is then JY := IY ∩ JX . For any
non-inductive Y , just set JY := ∅.
A subinterval I ⊆ JX is straight if, for all non-annular,proper subsurfaces
 Y ( X,
S
we have diamY (I) ≤ T1 (X). Here diamY (I) := diamC(Y )
j∈I πY (V (τj )) .
Note that if Y is an inductive subsurface then Y ∈ Σ2 (τ ). This is because, for any
Y 6∈ Σ2 (τ ) with IY 6= ∅, there is an index s such that IY ( DIs , necessarily for a
γs intersecting ∂Y (claims 1, 2 in Lemma 2.5.3) and then, for any i, j ∈ IY , one has
dY (i, j) ≤ C2 + 2F (32N1 (S X ) + 4) by Remark 2.5.4 combined with Lemma 2.2.13.
Hence one may subdivide JX = [min JX , min IY ] ∪ (JX ∩ IY ) ∪ [max IY , max JX ] (one
155

or more intervals may be empty, as we may have defined an upper bound lower than
the lower bound), and get dY (JX ) ≤ 2K0 + C2 + F (32N1 (S X ) + 4) < T0 (X) with an
application of Theorem 2.3.2.
Lemma 2.5.12. (Plays the role of [MMS12], Lemma 6.12) If I ⊆ JX is disjoint from
all inductive subintervals of JX , then I is straight for X.
The proof is the one of Lemma 6.12 in [MMS12], verbatim.
In our setting Claim 6.14 from [MMS12] (i.e. Lemma 2.5.9 above) reads:
If for a pair of indices k, l ∈ JX we have V (Uτ↓k |UX) = V (Uτ↓l |UX), then TX (k, l) ≤
N4 .
Similarly as noted at the beginning of §2.4.5, for all C ≥ M6 (X) there are constants
e0 (S, C), e1 (S, C) such that, for all k, l ∈ JX ,
e−1
0 dP+ (X) (τk , τl ) − e1 − C1 ≤

X

[dY (τk , τl )]C ≤ e0 dP+ (X) (τk , τl ) + e1 + C1

Y ⊂X essential
and non-annular

(2.2)
where C1 = C1 (X).
Lemma 2.5.13. (Plays the role of [MMS12], Lemma 6.13) Let I ⊆ JX be a straight
subinterval. Then |TX (I)| ≤A dX (I), for a constant A = A(X).
Proof. Let [p, q] = I.
Fix C := 1 + max{M6 (X), T1 (X)} and let
R1 := max{e0 (X, C), e1 (X, C) + C1 (X)} + 1. Define a map ρ : [0, M ] → I, starting with ρ(0) := p, and recursively setting ρ(n + 1) to be the smallest element in
[ρ(n), q] with dP+ (X) (ρ(n), ρ(n + 1)) = R1 , until this is no longer defined: when this
stage is reached, set M := n + 1 and ρ(M ) = q.
Then for all 0 ≤ n ≤ M − 1, and all ρ(n) ≤ j ≤ ρ(n + 1), we get that
dP+ (X) (τρ(n) , τj ) ≤ R1 , so dM+ (U X) (↓ρ(n), ↓j)U ≤ Ψ0S (R1 ) according to Proposition
2.5.6.
We define V to be the maximum cardinality for a ball of radius Ψ0S (R1 ) in M+ (X):
then the sequence Uτ (↓ρ(n), ↓ρ(n + 1)) has all the respective entries V (τj |X) lying
within one of these balls. So, via the above claim, |TX (ρ(n), ρ(n + 1)| ≤ N4 V and
therefore |TX (I)| ≤ N4 V · M .
Claim 6.15 in [MMS12] holds for us (just replace M(X) with P+ (X) and employ
formula 2.2 above; in particular, perform the summation over non-annular subsurfaces
Y only):
156

For 0 ≤ n ≤ M − 2, dX (ρ(n), ρ(n + 1)) ≥ R0 + 1.
The remainder of the proof of the present lemma is the same the final part in
the proof of Lemma 6.13 in [MMS12], where M ≤ dX (I) + 1 is obtained. Hence the
bound on the number of splits.



When X ∼
= S1,1 or S0,4 , the proof of the key claim ends here because, as X has no
subsurfaces, all intervals can be supposed to be straight. Theorem 1.2.9 and Lemma
1.2.12, applied for these subsurfaces, assert that P+ (X) is quasi-isometric to C(X).
So the key claim, for these subsurfaces, coincides with the statement of the above
lemma. We now continue for the induction step.
All that is said in [MMS12] from Definition 6.17 to Lemma 6.20 applies completely
in our setting. Our proof continues with that chunk of proof, replacing all occurrences
of SX there with TX ; the constants N1 , N2 there with K1 , K2 respectively; references
to Lemmas 6.12 and 6.13 there with our Lemmas 2.5.12, 2.5.13 respectively.
Definition 2.5.14. Assign an index r ∈ TX (JX ) to a subsurface Y ∈ Ind0 if r ∈ JY ,
if the split from Uτr to Uτr+1 is visible in UY , and there is no other Z ∈ Ind, Z ( Y ,
with these properties.
For I ⊆ JX , denote the set of indices in TX (I) which are assigned to Y by AIY (I) ⊆
TY (JY ).
Lemma 2.5.15. Let Y ∈ Ind. There is a constant B = B(X) such that, if I ⊆ JY
has all indices in TX (I) assigned to X, then |TX (I)| ≤ B.
Proof. Let [p, q] = I. First we follow the approach of Lemma 6.16 in [MMS12] to
prove the existence of a bound, depending on X only, for dC(X) (V (τp |X), V (τq |X)).
Since p, q ∈ JY ⊆ IY , Theorem 2.3.2 asserts that ∂Y is wide when put in efficient
position with respect to τp or to τq ; and, via lift, also when put in efficient position
with respect to τpX or τqX . Let α ∈ V (τp |X) and identify it with a carried realization,
which we may suppose to realize the intersection number of α with ∂Y — if it does
not, one may fix this with the bigon removal technique employed in the proof of
Corollary 4.3 from [MMS12].
As ∂Y is wide in τp , it crosses each of the branch rectangles in N̄ (τp ) — which are
at most N1 : see Lemma 2.1.18 — in at most two connected components each. So it
intersects at most 2N1 branch rectangles of τpX . For each branch rectangle Rb of τpX ,
the intersections α ∩ Rb and ∂Y ∩ Rb consist of at most two arcs each; so α ∩ ∂Y ∩ Rb

157

is at most 4 points, else there is a bigon. This bounds i (α, ∂Y ); and, via Lemma
1.2.4, also dX (α, ∂Y ).
The same bound applies for all α ∈ V (τq |X). So, via triangle equality, we also
have a bound for dC(X) (V (τp |X), V (τq |X)); and, via Lemma 2.2.13, for dX (p, q).
Now we prove that I is straight i.e. we look for a bound for dZ (J), for Z ∈ Ind
and ∅ 6= J ⊆ I a subinterval. First we find a bound for dZ (J ∩ IZ ), provided that the
given interval J ∩ IZ = [k, l] is nonempty. For ease of notation, let also I 0 := I ∩ IZ .
Since ↓[k, l] contains only indices of TX (JX ) assigned to X, and not to any proper,
0
inductive subsurface, (Uτj 0 |UZ)↓l
j 0 =↓k includes no split move. Define τ0 := t(min I ),
S1
(DIt ∪ N It ) ⊆
and t1 as the highest t such that max I 0 ≥ max DIt . Then tt=t
0

St1
0
0
DIt0 ∪N It0 ∪I and I ⊆
t=t0 (DIt ∪ N It ) ∪DKt1 +1 (by convention, DKr+1 = {N }).
We know from claim 1 in Lemma 2.5.3 that, for all t0 < t ≤ t1 : γt does not cut
∂Z; moreover, the splits in Uτ , indexed by DItU , shall be invisible when inducing the
tracks to UZ. This means that Uγt does not intersect UZ at all, and that γt does not
intersect Z.
Claim 7 in Lemma 2.5.3 applies for I 0 , and therefore for J. The entries of τ (I 0 )
which do not reflect in an entry of Uτ (↓I 0 ) are contained in some DIt \ DLt for
t0 + 1 ≤ t ≤ t1 or in DKt1 +1 . Set J 00 := (DKt1 +1 ∩ [k, l]) ∪ {l} (so that l ∈ J 00
00

J
anyway). By said claim, the sequence (Uτj 0 |UZ)j 0 ∈↓J is obtained from (τj |Z)min
by
j=k

application of φ̂t0 : S Z → S U Z to each entry, and possibly removal of some repeated
ones. If τj |Z splits to τj+1 |Z for j, j + 1 ∈ [k, l], then neither of the two belongs
to DIt \ DLt , for t0 + 1 ≤ t ≤ t1 , otherwise disjointness of γt from Z would be
contradicted. So in that case j, j + 1 ∈ DKt1 +1 ∩ [k, l].
When one induces to Z the subsequence τ (k, min J 00 ), only comb equivalences and
subtrack extractions are seen. While a subtrack always has less non-mixed branches
than the almost track it is taken from, comb equivalences are unable to alter the
count of these branches. So dC(Z) (V (τk |Z), V (τmin J 00 |Z)) ≤ N1 K2 .
And the distance spanned in J 00 , when this interval is not trivial, is cared after
with Lemma 2.4.34 and Remark 2.5.46 : dC(Z) (V (τmin J 00 |Z), V (τl |Z)) ≤ C2 . Combining the two estimates, and using Lemma 2.2.13, we have dZ (k, l) ≤ N1 K2 + C2 +

2F 8N1 (S X ) .
In general, we may need to add a contribution for the distance spanned in [min J, k]
and in [l, max J] (if either, or both, are nonempty): so dZ (J) ≤ N1 K2 + C2 +

2F 8N1 (S X ) + 2K0 , by Theorem 2.3.2. This last bound holds also if J ∩ IZ is
empty.
6

These two exclude the case of γt1 +1 disjoint from Z, but the way to deal with it is obvious.

158

This proves that I is a straight interval, and there is a bound for dX (I): but then,
Lemma 2.5.13 ensures that there is a bound |TX (I)| ≤ B, too.



Lemma 2.5.16. (Plays the role of [MMS12], Lemma 6.22) There is a constant A =
A(X) such that


 [

X


TX (JY ) ≤A |Ind| +
dY (JX ).



Y ∈Ind

Y ∈Ind

Proof. Given any maximal interval I among the ones treated in the lemma above, we
have just shown that |TX (I)| ≤ B. This implies that, for a suitable constant A0 ,




 [

 [

X




TX (JY ) ≤A0 
AIY (JY ) ≤
|TY (JY )|.





Y ∈Ind

Y ∈Ind

Y ∈Ind

We now apply the inductive hypothesis given by the key claim: |TY (JY )| ≤A dP+ (Y ) (JY )
for a constant A = A(X).
Let C := 1 + max{M6 (Y ), T0 (X) + 2R0 }. Then, as shown in formula 2.2 above,
X
dP+ (Y ) (JY ) ≤E
[dZ (JY )]C
Z⊆Y non-annular

for a suitable constant E(S, C) > 1. The proof ends as the one of Lemma 6.22 of
[MMS12], verbatim.



The proof ends for us the same way as the proof of Proposition 6.9 in [MMS12]
after proving Lemma 6.22. It just suffices to replace occurrences of SX there with
TX ; the ones of M(X) with P+ (S); and references to lemmas previously proved there
with the lemmas above.
It is just worth marking that the final estimate |Ind0 | ≤A dP+ (X) (JX ) may be
proved simply by saying that
1
1 X
[dY (JX )]T0 ≤E(X;T0 )
dP (X) (JX )
|Ind0 | ≤
T0 Y ∈Ind0
T0 +
again by application of formula 2.2.



Corollary 2.5.17. There is a constant C8 = C8 (S) such that the following is true.
Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic splitting sequence of birecurrent, cornered train tracks on
S. Let X be a subsurface of S with X ⊇ S 0 the subsurface, not necessarily connected,
filled by V (τ0 ), and suppose that V (τN |X) is a vertex of P+ (X): then
dP+ (X) (V (τ0 |X), V (τN |X)) ≥C8 |U(Rτ )|.
159

Proof. Subdivide τ = τ 1 ∗ ε2 ∗ τ 2 ∗ . . . ∗ εw ∗ τ w as it is done before Definition
2.5.2. To simplify notations, we may replace each τ u with the respective Rτ u . For
1 ≤ u ≤ w, let J u be the interval of indices in τ supplied by τ u . The subsequence τ u
will evolve firmly in a (possibly disconnected) subsurface S u ⊂ S and so will do Uτ u ;
u
let S u = T1u t . . . t Tk(u)
be the decomposition into connected components.
P
u u
Step 1: for each 1 ≤ u ≤ w, |Uτ u | ≤ N0 N14 +1 k(u)
i=1 |Uτ |Ti . When using this notation,

we agree that |Uτ u |Tiu = 0 when Tiu is an annulus.
Let p, q ∈ ↓J u be two indices such that no split in Uτ (p, q) is visible in any of the
non-annular connected components of S u . Let Tiu be non-annular. Our assumption on
the interval of indices [p, q] implies that, within this interval, the induced tracks Uτj |Tiu
may change only under comb equivalences and subtrack extractions. Consequently,
if j 0 > j, then V (Uτj 0 |Tiu ) ⊆ V (Uτj |Tiu ). In Lemma 2.2.11 we have shown that
V (Uτj |Tiu ) = V (Uτj ) ∩ C(Tiu ).
S
So we have V (Uτj ) = Ξu ∪ T u non-annular V (Uτj |Tiu ), where Ξu is the collection of
i

all core curves of the Tiu which are annuli; therefore this set is also decreasing as j
increases in [p, q]. As a consequence of Lemma 2.1.18, then, V (Uτj ) changes at most
N0 times within the interval [p, q]. By Lemma 2.5.9 applied on the entire surface S,
then, |Uτ u (p, q)| ≤ N4 N0 .
In other words, among every N0 N4 + 1 consecutive splits in Uτ u , at least one of
them must be visible in one of the connected components of S u .
Step 2: we claim that there is a constant A = A(S) such that, for each 1 ≤ u ≤ w,
X
[dY (J u )]M
|Uτ u | ≤A
Y ⊂X essential
and non-annular

where M ≥ max ({M6 (X)|X subsurface of S} ∪ {2}) is fixed.
According to formula 2.2 above, for all Z ⊆ X, Z subsurface of S, there is a
constant e = e(S, M ) such that:
X
dP+ (Z) (J u ) =e
[dY (J u )]M =: sum(Z, M, u)
Y ⊂Z essential
and non-annular

for a suitable constant M which we may suppose to be depending only on S. The
formula may be given sense also for Z an annulus: in that case the summation is
empty, and the dP+ (Z) (J u ) can also be set to 0.
Clearly (see the Remark following Lemma 2.2.11), S u ⊆ S 0 ⊆ X. The family of
all non-annular subsurfaces Y ⊂ X can be partitioned into:
• the sub-families of subsurfaces Y ⊂ Tiu — one for each 1 ≤ i ≤ k(u);
160

• the sub-family of all subsurfaces Y which are cut by ∂S u ;
• the sub-family of all subsurfaces Y essentially disjoint from S u .
If Y is any of the subsurfaces as in the second bullet and j, j 0 ∈ J u , then any α ∈
πY (V (τj )), β ∈ πY (V (τj 0 )) will not intersect πY (∂S u ) 6= ∅. So dY (α, β) ≤ 2 ≤ M .
The surfaces as in the third bullet, instead, just do not exist, because V (τN |X) ∈
P+ 0 (X) implies V (τj |X) ∈ P+ 0 (X) for all j ∈ J u , too. So X \ S u consists of discs,
punctured discs, annuli and pairs of pants.
This yields that only the subsurfaces as in the first bullet count in the summation
P
u
sum(X, M, u), which is thus equal to k(u)
i=1 sum(Ti , M, u).
From Step 1 above and Proposition 2.5.10 we have
|Uτ u | ≤

1
N0 N4 +1

Pk(u)
i=1

|Uτ u |Ti ≤C7 (N0 N4 +1)

Pk(u)
i=1

dP+ (Ti ) (J u ).

According to equalities we have established previously, then, there is a constant
A = A(S) such that
|Uτ u | ≤A

Pk(u)
i=1

sum(Tiu , M, u) = sum(X, M, u).

Step 3: proof of the statement.
Recall the constant K2 introduced in the proof of Proposition 2.5.10.

Fix

M ≥ max ({M6 (X)|X subsurface of S} ∪ {2}) + 2(ξ(S) − 1)R0 .
P
u
Note that, for each subsurface Y ⊂ X, dY (τ0 , τN ) ≥ w
u=1 dY (J ) − 2(w − 1)R0
by repeated application of Lemma 1.2.7.
Let E := max0≤j≤ξ(S) e (S, M − 2jR0 ); and let M 0 := M − 2(w − 1)R0 . Then
P
dP+ (X) (0, N ) =E
Y ⊂X essential [dY (0, N )]M 0
and non-annular
P
1
w
≥
Y ⊂S essential ([dY (J ) + . . . + dY (J )]M − r(X)))
and non-annular

where r(X) = 2(w − 1)R0 if the other summand
is nonzero,

 and 0 otherwise. A simple

0
computation shows that [x]M − r(X) ≥ 1 − 2(ξ(S)−1)R
[x]M (the bracketed term is
M
−1

0
positive). So, if E 0 = E 1 − 2(ξ(S)−1)R
, then
M

P
1
w
dP+ (X) (0, N ) ≥E 0
Y ⊂X essential [dY (J ) + . . . + dY (J )]M
and non-annular
P
P
P
≥ Y ([dY (J 1 )]M + . . . + X [dY (J w )]M ) = w
u=1 sum(X, M, u).
P
Step 1 above gives
(X, M, u) ≥A |Uτ u | = |ψu · Uτ u |:
Pw
u=1 sum(X, M, u) ≥A |Uτ | − ξ(S) + 1. This concludes the proof.
From Proposition 2.5.8 and Corollary 2.5.10 we easily derive:
161

therefore


Corollary 2.5.18. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic splitting sequence of birecurrent,
cornered train tracks on S. Let X be a subsurface of S with X ⊇ S 0 the subsurface,
not necessarily connected, filled by V (τ0 ), and suppose that V (τN |X) is a vertex of
P+ (X). Let τ 0 be another splitting sequence, beginning and ending with the same
train tracks as τ . Then
|U(Rτ )| =C6 C8 |U(Rτ 0 )|.
We may now prove a slightly generalized statement for Theorem 2.3.1:
Theorem 2.5.19. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic splitting sequence of birecurrent train
tracks on S, not necessarily cornered ones. Let X be a subsurface of S with X ⊇ S 0
the subsurface, not necessarily connected, filled by V (τ0 ), and suppose that V (τN |X)
is a vertex of P+ (X). Then, for a constant C9 = C9 (S) independent of τ ,
dP+ (X) (0, N ) =C9 |U(R(Cτ ))|.
Proof. Consider a cornerization Cτ = (Cτj )M
j=0 of the splitting sequence τ . Point
4 in Lemma 2.2.27 gives, in particular, that Cτ0 is a cornerization of τ0 and CτM
is a cornerization of τN . In particular, as V (τ0 |X) ⊆ C(Cτ0 |X) and V (τN |X) ⊆
C(CτM |X), an application of Lemma 2.2.11 and following observations gives that
V (Cτ0 |X), V (CτM |X) are vertices of P+ (X).
By Remark 2.2.24 the number of splits turning Cτ0 into τ0 , and CτM into τN , is
bounded in terms of the topology of S. Therefore dP+ (τ0 , Cτ0 ) and dP+ (CτM , τN ) are
also bounded.
Finally,
dP+ (X) (Cτ0 , CτM ) =max{C6 ,C8 } |U(R(Cτ ))|,
by a combination of Proposition 2.5.8 and of Corollary 2.5.5.
The triangle inequality completes the proof.



Corollary 2.5.20. Let τ = (τj )N
j=0 be a generic splitting sequence of birecurrent train
tracks on S. Let X be a subsurface of S with X ⊇ S 0 the subsurface, not necessarily
connected, filled by V (τ0 ), and suppose that V (τN |X) is a vertex of P+ (X). Then
(σj )M
j=0 = σ := R(Cτ ) describes an unparametrized quasi-geodesic in the pants graph.
If J is the sequence of indices 0 ≤ j < M such that j, j + 1 ∈ DLt ∪ N It for some
0 ≤ t ≤ q (see Definition 2.5.1 and following constructions) and σj splits to σj+1 ,
then (V (σj ))j∈J describes a max{C6 , C8 }-quasi-geodesic in P+ (X).

162

Proof. With minor adaptations to Proposition 2.5.8, Proposition 2.5.10, Corollary
2.5.17, one proves that for any two indices 0 ≤ k ≤ l ≤ M ,
|(Uσ)(↓k, ↓l)| ≤C8 dP+ (X) (V (σk ), V (σl )) ≤C6 |(Uσ)(↓k, ↓l)|
which is just a restatement of our second claim.
In

order to prove the first claim, it is sufficient to prove that
dP+ (X) (V (σa ), V (σb )) ≤ C2 for all a, b comprised between two consecutive indices
in J. For any two indices as such, there is a t such that, for all j ∈ [a, b] \ DIt , σj+1
is obtained from σj with a slide. We conclude with Lemma 2.4.34 and Remark 2.5.4,
combined.



163

164

Chapter 3
Hyperbolic volume estimates
3.1

Pseudo-Anosov mapping tori

In all this section, S is a closed surface and ψ : S → S is a pseudo-Anosov diffeomorphism. We give an application of our main theorem and of Theorem 1.3.4 proved
by Brock. Recall the introductory notions given in §1.3.2.
Given a measured lamination (λ, µ) and a train track τ on S, one may say that λ
is carried by τ if λ can be ambient-isotoped to lie in N (τ ), in a way that is transverse
to all ties: we are just repeating Definition 2.1.7 to suit this setting. Uniqueness of
carrying (Lemma 1.7.11 in [PH91], previously simplified in Proposition 2.1.11 here)
still holds. The bijection between rational transverse measures on a train track and
weighted multicurves, described in Proposition 2.1.14 here, is a simplified version of
Theorem 1.7.12 in [PH91], establishing a similar bijection between real transverse
measures and carried measured laminations.
We say that τ is suited to (λ, µ) if λ is fully carried by τ and N̄ (τ ) does not admit
any carried, properly embedded arc which is disjoint from some carried realization of
λ — this is equivalent to the definition given in [PP87] in terms of foliations, via the
correspondence explained in [Lev83]. Note that, when such an arc exists instead, it
is impossible that its ends lie along the same component of ∂v N̄ (τ ). We have that
Every measured lamination (λ, µ) has a birecurrent train track τ which is suited to
it.
This is a consequence of Corollary 1.7.6 in [PH91]: its statement only guarantees the
existence of a birecurrent τ which fully carries (λ, µ); but, if τ is not suited to λ, it
is sufficient to perform a multiple central split (see Definition 2.2.16) along any of
the carried arcs of τ which are disjoint from the carried realization of λ: this keeps
the train track transversely recurrent, and also recurrent because the new track still
165

fully carries (λ, µ) and we may apply Proposition 1.3.1 in [PH91]. Repeat until there
are no more carried arcs disjoint from the carried realization of λ: this takes a finite
number of steps.
In [Ago11] it described how, starting from (λ, µ) and a generic track τ0 suited to it,
one may define the maximal splitting sequence τ = (τj )+∞
j=0 : if τj has been defined, split
simultaneously all branches of τj which are given maximal weight by (λ, µ), with the
only parity which keeps (λ, µ) carried by the new track τj+1 . This sequence will not
feature any central split. And in Theorem 3.5 of that work, which improves Theorem
4.1 in [PP87], it is proved that
Theorem 3.1.1. Let (λs , µs ) be the stable lamination of ψ, and let τ0 be a train track
suited to (λs , µs ). The maximal splitting sequence τ built from τ0 has two associated
numbers m, n such that, for all j ≥ m,
τj+n = ψ(τj ).
Moreover, if µj ∈ M(τ ) is the transverse measure induced by (λs , µs ) on τj , then
µj+n = c−1 ψ∗ (µj ) where c > 1 is the constant associated to the pseudo-Anosov diffeomorphism ψ.
We prove the following
Theorem 3.1.2. Let (λs , µs ) be the stable lamination of ψ, and let τ0 be a birecurrent
train track suited to (λs , µs ). Let ρ := τ (m, m + n), using the notation of the above
theorem. Let M := S × [0, 1]∼ψ be the mapping torus built from S and ψ — which
is hyperbolic. Then there is a constant C10 , only depending on S, such that
vol(M ) =C10 |U(R(ρ))|.
Note: for the purposes of this theorem and in order to connect it with the previously developed theory, ρ may be considered as a sequence where exactly one split
occurs at each move: if more are split simultaneously, we just insert more intermediate
steps.
Lemma 3.1.3. All train tracks τj in a splitting sequence τ as in Theorem 3.1.2 are
cornered and birecurrent, and τ evolves firmly in S.
Proof. Each τj is cornered: if ∂ N̄ (τj ) includes a smooth component, then necessarily
λs includes a component which is a closed geodesic; but this contradicts minimality
of the stable lamination.
166

Since τ0 is transversely recurrent, all τj are. Also, they are recurrent because
they all fully carry the measured lamination (λs , µs ), so Proposition 1.3.1 in [PH91]
applies.
Let S 0 be the subsurface of S, possibly a disconnected one, which is filled by C(τm )
— and by V (τm ), by Lemma 2.2.11. Then C(τm+n ) = ψ · C(τm ) fills ψ(S 0 ); moreover,
up to isotopies, ψ(S 0 ) ⊆ S 0 , because of the decreasing filling properties of splitting
sequences, stated after Lemma 2.2.11. On the other hand, ξ(S 0 ) = ξ (ψ(S 0 ))1 , so
S 0 , ψ(S 0 ) are isotopic in S. If S 0 ( S, then ψ fixes ∂S 0 : and this contradicts the fact
that ψ, being pseudo-Anosov, is in particular irreducible.
So each set C(τm+in ) or V (τm+in ) for i ≥ 0 fills S. Since the filled surface decreases
along a splitting sequence, all V (τj ), j ≥ 0, fill S.



Proof (of Theorem 3.1.2). Note that M is hyperbolic because of Theorem 1.3.3.
Step 1: we prove that is sufficient to show the existence of a constant A = A(S) such
that, for all z ∈ Z>0 ,2
dP+ (S) (m, m + zn) ≥A z|U(R(ρ))|.
Suppose that this condition is true, and note that actually dP+ (S) (m, m + zn) =
dP+ (S) (V (τm ), ψ z · V (τm )). Lemma 1.2.12 proves that the inclusion P(S) ,→ P+ (S)
is a quasi-isometry, and this implies that there exists a pants decomposition p of S
such that dP(S) (p, ψ z (p)) ≥A0 z|U(R(ρ))| for another constant A0 = A0 (S), and for all
z ∈ Z>0 . So the stable translation distance in P(S) is |ψ|st ≥A0 |U(R(ρ))|.
On the other hand, Proposition 2.5.8 gives that dP+ (S) (m, m + n) ≤A00 |U(R(ρ))|,
and this proves that also |ψ| ≤A000 |U(R(ρ))| (again here A00 , A000 depend on S only).
Remark 1.3.5 and Brock’s Theorem 1.3.4 conclude the argument.
∗z :=
Let ω := Rρ, indexed as (ωj )N
ω ∗(ψ ·ω)∗. . .∗(ψ z−1 ·ω):
j=0 ; for z ∈ Z>0 , let ω
ω ∗z begins and ends with the same train tracks as τ (m, m + zn).
Step 2: given any curve γ ∈ C(S), the indices 0 ≤ i ≤ z − 1 such that γ is a twist
curve for at least one entry in the splitting sequence ω i := ψ i · ω = ω ∗z (iN, (i + 1)N )
are at most N0 + 1, and they are all consecutive. N0 was introduced in Lemma 2.1.18.
0

Let i, i0 be two indices such that γ is an effective twist curve in ρi , ρi . Suppose,
for a contradiction, that i0 − i ≥ N0 + 2. Then γ is a twist curve for at least one entry
0

of ρi and one of ρi . Necessarily (Lemma 2.4.11 applied to a sufficiently long initial
We may just define ξ(S 0 ) as the sum of the complexities of each connected component.
Here we use again the notation dP+ (S) (m, m + zn) when the splitting sequence is understood,
as it was introduced in §2.5.1.
1

2

167

segment of the sequence τ ), it is a twist curve in all entries in ρj for all i < j < i0 ;
and in particular γ is a twist curve in τm+jn = ψ j (τm ) for all i < j ≤ i0 .
Therefore ψ −j (γ) is a twist curve in τm for all i < j ≤ i0 . No two curves in this
family are isotopic, because all ψ −j are pseudo-Anosov (see Remark 1.3.2). They also
all belong to W (τm ), whose size is ≤ N0 . This is a contradiction.
Step 3: we define a generalized version of the untwisted sequence, fitted to our scenario, and prove some basic properties.
If γ1 , . . . , γr are the effective twist curves of ω (and of ρ), it is possible to subdivide [0, N ] into N I0 , DI1 , N I1 , . . . , DIr , N Ir as shown in §2.5.1. Since ω ∗z is the
concatenation of z ‘copies’ of ω, each transformed under a suitable power of ψ, one
may similarly subdivide [0, zN ] into
∗
∗
N I0∗ , DI1∗ , N I1∗ , . . . , DIzr
, N Izr

with the maximum of each interval coinciding with the minimum of the following one.
Note that each N Iir∗ , 0 < i < z, is the concatenation of a ‘copy’ of N Ir and a ‘copy’
of N I0 . One defines also DKt∗ , DL∗t ⊆ DIt∗ just as seen in §2.5.1.
For 1 ≤ t ≤ r, 1 ≤ i ≤ z −1, define γri+t = ψ i (γt ): then ω ∗z (DIt∗ ) has twist nature
about γt for all 1 ≤ t ≤ zr. The curves in (γt )zr
t=1 are not necessarily all distinct,
but we have proved in Step 2 that each of them occurs at most N0 + 1 times in this
enumeration.
If they were all distinct, then ω ∗z would be (γt )zr
t=1 -arranged: so we may say that
the above notation is a ‘variation’ of the notation used to describe arranged sequences,
in a more general case. We will see now how to generalize the constructions developed
in §2.5.
For notational convenience, let η1 , . . . , ηQ be an enumeration of the (γt )zr
t=1 such
that no curve occurs twice. The splitting sequence ω ∗z is (η1 , . . . , ηQ )-arranged, even if
in general each ηu admits more than one choice for a Dehn interval; and one may need
to change the order in which these curves are listed, in order to have (min DIηu )Q
u=1
increasing.
0

The definition of Uω = (Uωj )N
j=0 from ω in Definition 2.5.1 involves application
of diffeomorphisms φt for 1 ≤ t ≤ r. Let Ψ := φ−1
r ◦ ψ, and let
U ∗z ω := Uω ∗ (Ψ · Uω) ∗ . . . ∗ (Ψz−1 · Uω).
0

U ∗z ω = (U ∗z ωj )zN
j=0 serves as a generalization of the concept of untwisted sequence
∗z
for ω : informally, the latter sequence is ‘arranged except that the sequence (γt )
168

may include repetitions of the same curve’. The construction to get U ∗z ω from ω ∗z
is indeed exactly the same as in §2.5.1, except that here we do not require the curves
0
(γt )zr
t=1 to be distinct. A sequence of subintervals in [0, zN ]:
U∗
U∗
N I0U ∗ , DI1U ∗ , N I1U ∗ , . . . , DIzq
, N Izr

is naturally defined. The function ↓ : [0, zN ] → [0, zN 0 ], which, for all 1 ≤ t ≤ zr,
maps DL∗t onto the respective DItU ∗ and N It∗ onto the respective N ItU ∗ , is defined just
∗
U∗
as in §2.5.1, and so are the maps ↑, [t]↓, [t]↑. For X ⊆ S a subsurface, denote IX
, IX

its accessible interval with respect to the splitting sequences ω ∗z , U ∗z ω respectively.
For j ∈ [0, zN ], let t(j) be the least index t such that j ∈ DIt∗ or j ∈ N It∗ .
For j 0 ∈ [0, zN 0 ], let U ∗ t(j 0 ) be the least index t such that j ∈ DItU ∗ or j ∈ N ItU ∗ .
S
∗
∗
There are diffeomorphisms φ∗t for 1 ≤ t ≤ zq such that, for all j ∈ zr
t=0 (DLt ∪ N It ),
∗z
U ∗z ω↓j = φt(j) (ωj∗z ); and for all j ∈ [0, N 0 ], U ∗z ωj 0 = φU ∗ t(j 0 ) (ω↑j
0 ).
All claims in Lemma 2.5.3 work also in this setting (replace τ with ω ∗z , Uτ

with U ∗z ω, all index intervals with the starred versions defined here): this is because
the proof of that lemma makes no use of the fact that the curves γt were distinct
in its original setting. Similarly, the terminology introduced in Corollary 2.5.5 is
immediately adapted so that it will work here.
And using that terminology, if one defines the sequence U ∗ γ1 := φ∗N (γ1 ) (γ1 ), . . . ,
U ∗ γzr := φ∗N (γzr ) (γzr ), each U ∗z ω(DItU ∗ ) has twist nature with respect to U ∗ γt . Two
γt , γt0 coincide (up to isotopy) if and only if U ∗ γt , U ∗ γt0 do. So U ∗z ω is (U ∗ η1 , . . . , U ∗ ηQ )arranged.
Step 4: we claim a modified version of Proposition 2.5.6:
There is a constant C50 (S) such that the following is true.
∗
Let X ∈ Σ(ω ∗z ), X not an annulus, and let [k, l] ⊆ [0, zN ], with [k, l] ⊆ IX
if

X 6= S. Then
dP+ (U ∗ X) (↓k, ↓l)U ∗ ≤ C50 dP+ (X) (k, l)

2

and dP+ (X) (k, l) ≤ C50 dP+ (U ∗ X) (↓k, ↓l)U ∗

2

.

There are two increasing functions Ψ00S , Ψ000
S : [0, +∞) → [0, +∞) such that


dM+ (U ∗ X) (↓k, ↓l)U ∗ ≤ Ψ00S dP+ (U ∗ X) (↓k, ↓l)U ∗ ≤ Ψ000
d
(k,
l)
.
P
(X)
+
S
With the notation dP+ (X) (·, ·), this time, we measure pants distances along the
sequence ω ∗z ; and with dP+ (U ∗ X) (·, ·)U ∗ , distances along U ∗z ω.
The proof of this fact follows the proof of Proposition 2.5.6, with few modifications.
As explained above, the intervals which index the sequences ω ∗z and U ∗z ω admit a
169

∗
zr
subdivision with respect to the sequences of curves (γt )zr
t1 , (U γt )t=1 , respectively,

similarly to arranged splitting sequences.
In Step 1 of the original proof several definition were given, which we repeat
without substantial modifications here. The only thing that needs to be clarified is
why the number q of curves to be considered is bounded by the pants distance, since
those curve may appear multiple times in the current setting.
For each 1 ≤ u ≤ Q let hui be a choice of t such that γt = ηu and, if possible, such
∗
that DIhui
⊆ [k, l]. Consider ω as (η1 , . . . , ηQ )-arranged (possibly reindexing these
curves). As a consequence of Proposition 2.4.33, then, the number of indices u such
∗
⊆ [k, l] is bounded from above by C3 dP+ (X) (k, l) + C4 .
that ηu ⊆ X and DIhui

So, as we define δ1 = γt1 , . . . , δq = γtq to be the curves (here listed with repetitions
allowed) such that DIt∗s ∩ [k, l] 6= ∅ and γt intersects X essentially, we find that the
ones such that DIt∗s ⊆ [k, l] are disjoint from ∂X (by claim 1 in Lemma 2.5.3 adapted
∗
⊂ [k, l], each
to this setting). Therefore they are exactly the curves ηu with DIhui

counted at most N0 + 1 times. Moreover, it is only for s = 1, q one may have
simultaneously DIt∗s \ [k, l], DIt∗s ∩ [k, l] 6= ∅. So q ≤ c · dP+ (X) (k, l) for a suitable
c = c(S).
The same ideas may be applied to bound q in terms of pants distance in U ∗z ω.
Under the correspondence U ∗ given by Corollary 2.5.5 in this modified setting, the
indices ts , 1 ≤ s ≤ q, turn out to be almost exactly the values of t such that U ∗ γt
intersects U ∗ X, DItUs ∗ ∩ [↓k, ↓l] 6= ∅. We say ‘almost’, because the only exception to
this last sentence is that U ∗ γtq may have DItUq ∗ ∩ [↓k, ↓l] = ∅. So it is also true that
q ≤ c · dP+ (U ∗ X) (↓k, ↓l)U ∗ , if c = c(S) is chosen suitably.
After these modifications, reconstructing Step 2 in the proof of Proposition 2.5.6
is straightforward.
Following Step 3 of that proof, we wish to prove the existence of constants depending on S such that, however one picks α ∈ C(X) with N = N (α) a regular
neighbourhood, for all 0 ≤ s ≤ q, and all j, j 0 ∈ XDL∗s ∪ XN Is∗ , dN (ωj∗z |X, ωj∗z0 |X)
∗
is bounded by this constant. Let IN
be the accessible interval for N in the sequence

ω ∗z .
∗
For each 0 ≤ i ≤ z, let [a(i), b(i)] = Hi := IN
∩ [j, j 0 ] ∩ [iN, (i + 1)N ]. Step 2 of

this proof implies immediately that there are at most N0 + 1 values of i such that
Hi 6= ∅, and they are consecutive — let Λ be their family. Then one may write

S
[j, j 0 ] = J− ∪ i∈Λ Hi ∪ J+ where J− , J+ , if nonempty, are intervals sharing only one
∗
element with IN
.

170

As all ω i are effectively arranged, the original proof of Proposition 2.5.6 provides
∗z
∗z
|X, ωb(i)
|X), for all i ∈ Λ. For what concerns J− =: [j, b], Theorem
bounds for dN (ωa(i)

2.3.2 gives that dN (ωj∗z , ωb∗z ) ≤ K0 . Similarly for J+ . So we have a bound for the
distance covered in each of the pieces in which we have split [j, j 0 ], and these pieces
are at most N0 + 3: hence the existence of a constant, c0 , bounding dN (ωj∗z |X, ωj∗z0 |X)
from above.
The remainder of Step 3, and Step 4, of Proposition 2.5.6 may be applied here
with no substantial modifications, thus completing the proof of our claim.
Step 5: The sufficient condition declared in Step 1 above holds.
Step 3 above acts in place of Proposition 2.5.6 to prove the following version of
Proposition 2.5.10, using exactly the same line of proof.
There is a constant C70 (S) such that
dP+ (S) (V (ω0∗z ), V (ω0∗z ))) ≥C70 |U ∗z ω|.
Finally, just note that V (ω0∗z ) = V (ρ0 ) = V (τm ); V (ω0∗z ) = V (τm+zn );
|U ∗z ω| = z|Uω| = z|U(Rρ)|.

3.2



Braids in the solid torus

Among mapping tori, the ones coming from braids in the way we are about to describe
admit an application of the train track machinery different from the one given in the
previous section. See [FM11], §9.1 for details about braids and interpretations of
braid groups.
Recall that the braid group on n strands,



 σi σj = σj σi
for |i − j| ≥ 2;

Bn := σ1 , . . . , σn−1 
σi σi+1 σi = σi+1 σi σi+1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1

(3.1)

has a natural identification with Mod(Dn2 ), where with Dn2 we mean the closed disk,
punctured n times. Here we identify Dn2 with





	
2
2
z ∈ R |kzk ≤ 1 \
−1 +
j, 0  j = 1, . . . , n .
n+1
This model, in particular, places all punctures along the horizontal axis R × {0}; and,
for 1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1, the generator σi of Bn corresponds to a half-twist in Dn2 , swapping
the i-th and the (i + 1)-th punctures counting from the left.

171

N (H)

O

H

strip base
strip end
Figure 3.1: The basic construction of a strip decomposition, with a marker O and a cutter
H. A puncture of Dn2 lies along the cutter. Strips are filled in light grey.

From now on, it will always be assumed that n ≥ 3, which implies ξ (int(Dn2 )) ≥ 4
i.e. int(Dn2 ) is a surface in the sense we have stuck with in all the previous work. For
simplicity, we will identify R with R × {0} and similarly for points and intervals in
the two sets.
If ψ ∈ Bn ∼
= Mod(Dn2 ) has a restriction to int(Dn2 ) which is pseudo-Anosov, then
2
we know that the mapping torus M := int(Dn ) × [0, 1]∼ψ is hyperbolic (see Theorem
1.3.3). This mapping torus actually admits a (diffeomorphic) embedding in R3 as
follows: if w is any word representing ψ in Bn , let w be a braid representation of the
word w, embedded in int(D2 ) × [0, 1] with the property that w ∩ (int(D2 ) × {0, 1}) =
	


2
j, 0  j = 1, . . . , n × {0, 1}.
−1 + n+1
The identification of each point of int(D2 ) × {0} with the corresponding point of
int(D2 ) × {1} (via the identity map int(D2 ) × {0} → int(D2 ) × {1}) produces a solid
torus T ∼
= int(D2 ) × S1 , which admits an embedding T ,→ R3 (so we identify it with
a chosen embedding). Through this quotient, w projects to a closed braid w in R3
which is fitted to T : each strand of w will project to a path or loop which intersects
the image of int(D2 ) × {t} only once for each 0 < t < 1. Our mapping torus M is
seen to be diffeomorphic to T \ w.

3.2.1

Strip decompositions

We give here a construction very similar to the one introduced in [DW07], even if our
definitions will have a more ‘visual’ flavour which will make it easier to relate them
with train track splitting sequences (see Figure 3.1).
Let p be (the union of all curves in) a pants decomposition on Dn2 ; suppose that
the curves of p are realized in a way that intersects R transversely, and such that
p ∪ R bounds no bigons. Fix O ∈ R, which we call a marker ; and let H := (−∞, O]
be the corresponding cutter . Fix N (R) := (R × (−ε, ε)), where ε > 0 is chosen so

172

that p ∩ R × (−2ε, 2ε) consists of a set of arcs joining the two opposite boundary
components R × {−ε}, R × {ε}. We can suppose, up to isotopies, that these arcs are
all vertical. Define also N (H) := H × (−ε, ε).
The strip decomposition β(p, O) is then defined as follows.
Let AC(p, H) be the set of all connected components of p \ N (H). In general,
AC(p, O) will consist of arcs and loops: we subdivide AC(p, O) = A(p, O) t C(p, O)
accordingly. We say that two arcs α1 , α2 ∈ A(p, O) are consecutive if there is a
closed region R = R(α1 , α2 ) ⊆ Dn2 , diffeomorphic to a rectangle, such that α1 , α2 are
two opposite sides of ∂R, the other two sides are two intervals along ∂ N̄ (R), and
int(R) ∩ p = ∅.
We say that two arcs in A(p, O) are parallel if they are in the same class under the
equivalence relation generated by consecutiveness: an equivalence class for parallelism
will be called a strip. The width of a strip is its size as a set. The strip decomposition
β(p, O) is then the disjoint union of C(p, 0) with the set of all strips in A(p, O).
If s ∈ β(p, O) is a strip, then
!
R(s) :=

[
α∈s

α



∪


[
α1 ,α2 ∈s
consecutive


R(α1 , α2 )

is again diffeomorphic to a rectangle, and the elements of s are then uniquely defined
from R(s) as the connected components of R(s) ∩ p. With this in mind, we may
confuse a strip s with the corresponding R(s).
In particular, each strip s has two bases, i.e. the two intervals I1 , I2 ∈ R such
that I1 × {ε1 } and I2 × {ε2 } are the two connected components of R(s) ∩ ∂ N̄ (H)
for a suitable (unique) choice of ε1 , ε2 ∈ {±ε}, and two ends, i.e. the two connected
components of R(s) ∩ (H × (−2ε, 2ε)).
We say that two strip ends e1 , e2 , belonging to either the same strip in β(p, O) or
distinct ones, overlap if the corresponding strip bases I1 , I2 have I1 ∩ I2 6= ∅. The two
ends are said to completely overlap if I1 = I2 . If e1 , e2 completely overlap and belong
to the same strip s, then s consists of a single arc which, together with a vertical arc
in N (H), makes up a curve in p: we cannot have more than one arc, else p contains
a pair of isotopic curves. In all other cases, the bases of s can be distinguished into a
left and a right one, according to the relative order of their minima in R. The same
terminology applies to the two ends of s.
A strip cut is an elementary move on a strip decomposition, defined as follows.
There are exactly two strip ends e1 , e2 which are ‘closest’ to the marker O, i.e. such
that the corresponding bases I1 , I2 have max I1 = max I2 and p ∩ R ∩ (max I1 , O] = ∅.
173

Figure 3.2: In the upper line is an example of strip cutting sequence obtained from the
pants decomposition drawn in the leftmost picture. In the lower line are the
train tracks obtained accordingly. Note how the cutter (the horizontal line)
in the upper pictures gets shorter and shorter. (This figure has been derived
from Figure 1 in [DW07]. Many thanks to Bert Wiest for having kindly agreed
to its reuse.)

Place the indices so that I1 is shorter, or equal, to I2 . Let O0 := max ((R ∩ p) \ I1 ):
then O0 < O. We define the strip cut of β(p, O) to be the strip decomposition β(p, O0 ).
A strip cutting sequence is a sequence of strip decompositions, each obtained from the
previous with a strip cut: an example is given in Figure 3.2.
It is convenient to have a closer look at what happens with a strip cut. When
e1 , e2 belong to one same strip s, then necessarily I1 = I2 and they must consist of a
single point, else p includes two isotopic curves — similarly to what has been noted
above. In this case, β(p, O) differs from β(p, O0 ) only in that a strip in the former,
consisting of a single arc, has been replaced with a loop.
When the strips s1 , s2 to which e1 , e2 belong are different, it may still be the
case that I1 = I2 i.e. s1 , s2 contain the same number of arcs. Then the move’s
effect is that β(p, O) \ {s1 , s2 } = β(p, O0 ) \ {s0 } for a strip s0 such that R(s) =
R(s1 ) ∪ R(s2 ) ∪ (I1 × (−ε, ε)). We say that s1 and s2 merge to s0 .
If I1 ( I2 instead, there are two (unique) strips s01 , s02 such that β(p, O)\{s1 , s2 } =
β(p, O0 ) \ {s01 , s02 } and the following is true. Assign each arc α ∈ s2 to a family s21
or s22 according to whether α ∩ e2 is contained in I1 × (−2ε, 2ε) or not, respectively.
Define R(s21 ), R(s22 ) exactly at it has been done above for a strip: they are again
two rectangles. Then R(s01 ) = R(s1 ) ∪ R(s21 ) ∪ (I1 × (−ε, ε)) while s02 = s22 — and
174

in particular R(s02 ) = R(s22 ). We say that s1 stretches to s01 while s2 shrinks to s02 .
Given a pants decomposition p, there is a canonical strip cutting sequence β p
defined from β(p, 1) and performing strip cuts until it is no longer possible (i.e. there
is no strip left).

3.2.2

Strip decompositions turn into train tracks

Strip cutting sequences are, morally, a particular case of train track splitting sequences. Given a strip decomposition β = β(p, O), we define a semigeneric train
track T β as follows: let G ⊆ AC(p, O) be a collection consisting of all elements of
C(p, O), and exactly one arc a(s) for each strip s ∈ β(p, O). If e is a strip end, let
a(e) be the only endpoint of a(s) which is contained in e. Let E be the family of all
pairs of overlapping strip ends. Finally, let Γ ⊂ Dn2 be a 1-complex obtained as the
union of the elements of G, plus a straight segment a(e1 , e2 ) joining a(e1 ) to a(e2 ),
for each pair (e1 , e2 ) ∈ E. If two of these new segments intersect each other, or one
intersects an element of G, then the point they share is an endpoint for both arcs.
Finally, homotope Γ to make sure that, for each strip s, each end e of s, and each
pair (e, e0 ) ∈ E for e0 another strip end, a(s) ∪ a(e, e0 ) is smoothly embedded.
Call T β the result of this operation: it is a pretrack.
Lemma 3.2.1. If β = β(p, O) is a strip decomposition, then T β is a birecurrent
train track.
Proof (Sketch). We only give a sketch of the argument proving that T β is a train
track. One has to make sure that S \ N0 (T β) includes no connected component
which is a:
• disc with smooth boundary: the existence of one would imply that p includes a
homotopically trivial curve;
• 1-punctured disc with smooth boundary: the existence of one would imply that
p includes a curve homotopic into a puncture;
• monogon: the existence of one would imply that p forms a bigon with R, which
was excluded at the beginning of the construction;
• bigon: the existence of one would imply that p has two distinct, isotopic components.
T β is recurrent because each branch is traversed by a connected component of p.
As for transverse recurrence, it suffices to exhibit a collection of curves in T β such
that, for each branch ∈ B(T β), there is a curve in the collection which can be put
in dual position with respect to T β, intersecting b. Recall the notation a(s), a(e1 , e2 )
175

used above for smooth segments in T β — which are parts of branches, but not
necessarily entire ones.


2
2
• For each pair of consecutive punctures −1 + n+1
j, 0 , −1 + n+1
(j + 1), 0 ,
0 ≤ j ≤ n − 1, include in the collection the round curve encircling them.
There is a realization of this curve, dual to T β, which intersect all segments
a(e1 , e2 ) for e1 , e2 strip ends located between the two punctures. And there is a
different realization which will intersect all segments a(s) for s a strip with an
end located between the two punctures. Both realizations intersect the elements
of C(p, O) which pass between the two given punctures.
• Include the curve encircling all punctures but the leftmost one −1 +

2
,0
n+1


.

More precisely, realize it in a way that encircles all Dn2 except for a small neigh

2
bourhood of ∂Dn2 and of −1, −1 + n+1
+ ε × {0}. Depending on what particular realization of the curve has been chosen, the curve will be dual to T β
and will intersect all segments a(e1 , e2 ) for e1 , e2 strip ends located to the left
of the leftmost puncture; or all segments a(s) for s a strip with an end in the
same locations. Both realizations all the elements of C(p, O) which pass to the
left of the leftmost puncture.
• Similarly, include the curve encircling all punctures but the rightmost one

2
−1 + n+1
n, 0 .
Figure 3.3 gives a local picture for these curves. In order to show that these curves
are actually in efficient position with respect to T β, one may apply an argument
similar as the one applied above to show that T β is a train track.



Figure 3.3: The curves showing transverse recurrence of T β as in Lemma 3.2.1. The
picture to the left shows, dashed, a round curve encircling two consecutive
punctures of Dn2 , and how it can be isotoped to be dual to T β, and intersect
any of the branches located ‘between’ the two punctures. The picture to the
right shows that a similar property holds for the round curve encircling all
punctures of Dn2 but the leftmost one — embedded in two different ways, as
prescribed in the proof of that lemma.

How do T β and T β 0 relate, when β 0 is a strip decomposition obtained from β
with a split?
176

s2

a(s2 )

s1

a(s2 )

s2

s1
Figure 3.4: When β strip cuts to β 0 and the strip cut causes a strip s1 to stretch and
another one, s2 to shrink, either T β 0 is comb equivalent to T β (line above),
or there is a sequence of elementary moves, which are all comb/uncomb moves
except for one split, turning T β to T β 0 . The first case occurs when the left
base of s2 is entirely contained in the base of another strip end, and the same
case otherwise. The split parity, in this latter case, is determined by the strip
widths before and after the cut.

When the strip cut causes the replacement of a strip containing a single arc with
a loop, or causes two strips to merge, T β = T β 0 . Otherwise, there is a strip s1 which
stretches and another one, s2 , which shrinks. Let e1 , e2 be the right ends of the two.
The strip cut reflects on T β the following way: first of all, let κ be a zipper in T β
such that κP begins at a(e2 ) and runs along a(s2 ). Unzip T β along κ: this gives a
track which is comb equivalent to T β. Now, in order to get T β 0 , another elementary
move is needed, which is either a comb or a split. Some more detail is given in Figure
3.4.
This means that, for a strip cutting sequence β = (βj )N
j=0 , the corresponding seN
quence (T βj )j=0 may be completed to a splitting sequence by deleting any redundant
entry and then possibly inserting, immediately after each T βj , a train track with
is obtained from it with an uncomb move. We call T β the splitting sequence thus
obtained.
Definition 3.2.2. A pants decomposition p of Dn2 is round if each connected component in the pants decomposition intersects R in exactly 2 points.
Corollary 3.2.3. There is a constant A1 = A1 (n) such that, if r is a round pants
decomposition in D2 and ψ ∈ Bn ∼
= Mod(D2 ), then
n

n

dP+ (Dn2 ) (r, ψ(r)) =A1 |U R C(T β ψ(r) )
177



|.

Note that, in this statement, we are letting it be understood that C(T β ψ(r) ) must
be turned into a generic splitting sequence in order for R and U to make sense (at
least if we wish to rely on the approach of §2.4, 2.5, which was meant for generic
splitting sequences only).
Proof. For simplicity, let T β ψ(r) =: τ = (τj )N
j=0 . Theorem 2.5.19 gives
|U (R (Cτ )) | =C9 dP+ (Dn2 ) (V (τ0 ), ψ(r)) .
Note that the number of strips in β (ψ(r), 1) is bounded in terms of n — a strip s is
uniquely determined by whether it lies above or below R, and by the punctures of Dn2
the two ends of s lie between. This implies that the number of distinct possibilities
for τ0 is bounded in terms of n, so there is a bound for dP+ (Dn2 ) (r, V (τ0 )). This proves
our claim.



Corollary 3.2.4. There is a constant A2 = A2 (n) such that the following is true.
Let r be a round pants decomposition in Dn2 and ψ ∈ Bn ∼
= Mod(Dn2 ) such that ψ
2
defines a pseudo-Anosov mapping class on int(Dn2 ). Let M := int(Dn ) × [0, 1]∼ψ be
the related mapping torus. Then, defining r(m) := ψ m (r),
vol(M ) =A2 lim sup
m→+∞


1
|U R C(T β r(m) ) |
m

and also
vol(M ) =A2

|U R C(T β φ(r) )

min



|

φ∈Conj(ψ)

where Conj(ψ) is the conjugacy class of ψ in Bn .
The same considerations as the ones after the statement of Corollary 3.2.3 apply.

Proof. We use a simplified notation s(ν) := |U R C(T β ν(r) ) | for ν ∈ Mod(Dn2 ).
As a consequence of Corollary 3.2.3 plus Lemma 1.2.12, there is a constant A01 =
A01 (n) such that, for each m > 0, one has dP(S) (r, r(m)) =A01 s(ψ m ).
So |ψ|st =A01 lim supm→+∞ m1 s(ψ m ) and, via Remark 1.3.5, there is a further constant A001 = A001 (n) such that |ψ| =A001 lim supm→+∞ m1 s(ψ m ).
Moreover, let p be a pants decomposition such that dP(S) (p, ψ(p)) = |ψ|. There
is a λ ∈ Mod(Dn2 ) such that λ(p) is round. The pants decompositions λ(p), r both
belong to the finite set in P(Dn2 ) consisting of round pants decompositions, so there
is an upper bound dP(S) (ψ(p), ψ ◦ λ−1 (r)) = dP(S) (p, λ−1 (r)) = dP(S) (λ(p), r) ≤ c
depending only on the number of strands n.
178

Thus dP(S) (r, λ ◦ ψ ◦ λ−1 (r)) = dP(S) (λ−1 (r), ψ ◦ λ−1 (r)) ≤ dP(S) (λ−1 (r), p) +
dP(S) (p, ψ(p)) + dP(S) (ψ(p), ψ ◦ λ−1 (r)) ≤ |ψ| + 2c, while dP(S) (r, λ ◦ ψ ◦ λ−1 (r)) =A01
s(λ ◦ ψ ◦ λ−1 ) from Corollary 3.2.3 above.
On the other hand, |ψ| ≤ dP(S) (ν −1 (r), ψ ◦ ν −1 (r)) however ν ∈ Mod(Dn2 ) is
chosen. Combining the two bounds, |ψ| =A001 minφ∈Conj(ψ) s(φ). Here we choose, for
simplicity, an A001 = A001 (n) such that both this coarse equality and the one proved
above hold.
Theorem 1.3.4 concludes.

3.2.3



Bounds without train tracks (sketch)

The splitting sequences arising as T β have several good properties, which we state
in Proposition 3.2.5. Due to these properties, it is not really necessary to switch to the
train track formalism and employ a derived splitting sequence such as

|U R C(T β ψ(r) ) | to have Corollaries 3.2.3 and 3.2.4. As a complete proof of
Proposition 3.2.5 would go partly beyond the scope of this thesis, we only outline it.
We need a definition. Let a strip decomposition β(p, M ) be given, with the property that the strip cut on this decomposition will result in a strip s1 to stretch, and
another one s2 to shrink to a strip s02 . Let e be the right end of s2 , e0 be the left one.
If the two strip ends of s2 partially overlap and so do the ones of s02 , then the move is
a spiralling of s2 . Let I be the left base of s2 , and let M 0 := max I. Successive strip
cuts will turn β(p, M ) into β(p, M 0 ), and generate a strip cutting sequence ς with a
(j)

(j)

sequence (s2 )kj=1 of strips, one for each decomposition in ς, such that s2 shrinks to
(j+1)

s2

(j)

for all 1 ≤ j < k. If each cut in ς is a spiralling of the respective s2 — i.e. if
(k)

the ends of s2 still overlap — then we say that ς is a complete spiralling of s2 . See
Figure 3.5.
Let γ be the only curve of V (T β(p, M )) which traverses only a(s2 ) and a(e, e0 ),
both exactly once. Then γ is a twist curve for T β(p, M ). A spiralling move reflects
into an elementary move which is twist3 with respect to γ, and if ς is a complete
spiralling turning β(p, M ) into β(p, M 0 ), then T β(p, M 0 ) = Dγε (T β(p, M )), with ε
the sign of γ as a twist curve. We call γ the spiralled curve.
Given a strip cutting sequence β, the subsequence β(k, l) is a maximal spiralling
(j)

if there is a sequence (s2 )lj=k of strips, one for each decomposition in β(k, l), such
3

We have not defined what this means in a semigeneric setting. We may say that an elementary
move on a track τ with respect to a twist curve γ is twist if, given Aγ a twist collar, the move is the
result of unzipping along a zipper κ : [−ε, t] → N̄ (τ ), which does not intersect τ.γ and such that
κ([0, t]) ⊆ Aγ . Also, we may define the sign of γ as the sign γ has in any generic track which is
comb equivalent to τ .

179

s2

e M0
e

0

M
s1

Figure 3.5: The successive cuts occurring in a complete spiralling.
(j)

(j+1)

that s2 shrinks to s2
of the respective

(j)
s2 ,

for all k ≤ j < l, each strip cut in β(k, l) is a spiralling

and β(k, l) is not contained in any longer subsequence of β

with the same properties. It may not be possible to subdivide a maximal spiralling
into complete spirallings, but note that T (β(k, l)) has twist nature about one same
spiralled curve γ.
We will sketch the proof of the following Proposition.
Proposition 3.2.5. Let p be a pants decomposition of Dn2 , and let (τj )N
j=0 = τ :=
T β p : in particular, V (τN ) = p. Then there is a constant A3 = A3 (S) such that
dP+ (Dn2 ) (Cτ0 , CτN ), dP+ (Dn2 ) (τ0 , τN ), dP (r, p) =A3 kβ p k,
where kβ p k is the number of strip cuts in the sequence β p , renormalized so that each
maximal spiralling is counted as only 1; and r is any round pants decomposition of
Dn2 .
A restatement of Corollary 3.2.4 follows from the above Proposition:
Corollary 3.2.6. There is a constant A4 = A4 (n) such that the following is true.
Let r be a round pants decomposition in Dn2 and ψ ∈ Bn ∼
= Mod(Dn2 ) be such that ψ
2
defines a pseudo-Anosov mapping class on int(Dn2 ). Let M := int(Dn ) × [0, 1]∼ψ be
the related mapping torus. Then, defining r(m) := ψ m (r),
vol(M ) =A4 lim sup
m→+∞

1 r(m)
kβ
)k
m

and also
vol(M ) =A4

min

kβ φ(r) )k

φ∈Conj(ψ)

where Conj(ψ) is the conjugacy class of ψ in Bn .
180

The important property of spiralling moves is that they encode almost all elementary moves affecting twist curves:
Lemma 3.2.7. Let β be a strip cutting sequence Dn2 , and let τ := T β. Let γ ∈
C(Dn2 ) be a twist curve at some stage along the splitting sequence τ ; more precisely
let Iγ be the accessible interval of N (γ), and suppose that k, l are the indices such
that τ (Iγ ) = T (β(k, l)).
Then there is a number A5 = A5 (n) ≥ 3 such that, if more than A5 strip cuts in
β(k, l) reflect into moves on a train track level which are not far from γ, then the
ones after the A5 -th are all spirallings with γ their spiralled curve (in particular they
all occur consecutively).
The proof of this lemma is based on the fact that, every time a strip is cut, at
least one branch end of the respective τj disappears, or is replaced with a new one
located to the left of the old one. Whilst j increases within the interval [k, l], and
branch ends get concentrated to the left hand side of Dn2 , the number of strips s such
that a(s) ⊆ τj .γ decreases. When there is only one such s, γ is certainly a combed
curve in the respective τj . And, provided that γ stays carried, it takes a bounded
number of cuts, affecting the respective τj .γ’s, before we reach that stage.
Some further properties hold:
• After a maximal spiralling with γ its spiralled curve, the next strip cut reflects
into γ not being carried any longer by the new train track;
• A spiralling cannot change the subsurface filled by the set of vertex cycles of
the related train tracks.
• Let τ = T β for β a strip cutting sequence. Then there is a number A6 such
that, if a curve γ ∈ C(Dn2 ) and two indices j, j 0 are such that dN (γ) (τj , τj 0 ) ≥ A6 ,
then not only γ needs become a twist curve at some stage between j and j 0 , but
it undergoes elementary moves which are produced by spiralling.
• If T β(k, l) consists of m > 1 complete spiralling with γ the spiralled curve, and
ε(m−1)

σ(k 0 , l0 ) = C (T β(k, l)), then σl0 = Dγ
γ is a twist curve in σi .

σi for an index k 0 ≤ i < l0 such that

All this means that:
Lemma 3.2.8. There is a constant A7 = A7 (n) such that the following is true.
Let β be a strip cutting sequence in Dn2 , let (τj )N
j=0 = τ := C (T β), and let γ ∈
C(Dn2 ) be a curve such that two indices 0 ≤ k < l ≤ N exist with dN (γ) (τk , τl ) ≥ A7 .
Then there is an interval DIγ = [p, q] ⊆ [0, N ] such that γ is a twist curve for all τj ,
181

j ∈ DIγ , with some sign ε, τq = Dγεm (τp ) for some m ≥ 2K0 + 4, and the moves in
τ (DIγ ) all derive from spirallings where γ is the spiralled curve.
Moreover, if [j, j 0 ] ⊂ [0, N ] intersects DIγ at an endpoint at most, then
dN (γ) (τj , τj 0 ) ≤ A6 .
A similar property is true for T β instead of τ .
This means, in particular, that any subsequence of τ which evolves firmly in some
(not necessarily connected) subsurface of Dn2 is effectively arranged (see Definition
2.4.31), possibly changing the constants involved in the definition of effectively arranged sequence.
Subdivide τ = τ 1 ∗ ε2 ∗ τ 2 ∗ . . . ∗ εw ∗ τ w as seen in §2.5.1: one proves, with no
substantial changes from §2.4.5 and §2.5, that
There is a constants A8 = A8 (n), such that the following is true.
Let p be a pants decomposition on Dn2 , and let r be a round pants decomposition. Let
p
(τj )N
j=0 = τ := C(T β ). Then
dP (r, p), dP+ (r, p), dP+ (τ0 , τN ) =A8 |Uτ | .
Here, U is defined piece-by-piece as in Definition 2.5.2.
Note that counting the number of splits in Uτ gives roughly the same number
as counting their number in τ , but assigning a fixed weight to each interval DIγ ,
no matter how many splits it includes. And if one counts splits in this latter way in
T β obtains again the same number, roughly (see Lemma 2.2.27 and the last bullet
above).
The only passage left to prove that this last number is roughly kβ p k and complete
the proof of Proposition 3.2.5 is the following Lemma:
Lemma 3.2.9. There is a bound A9 (n) such that, if β is a strip cutting sequence on
Dn2 , and T (β(k, l)) consists of comb equivalences only, then l − k ≤ A9 .
As a conclusion to this work, we note that Corollary 3.2.6 implies a closed formula
for hyperbolic volume, of which David Futer has an independent proof, unpublished
at the time of writing. A set of generators for the Bn , larger than the standard one
given in the presentation (3.1), is given by
∆ := {∆ij := (σi · · · · · σj−1 )(σi · · · · · σj−2 ) . . . σi |0 ≤ i < j ≤ n}

182

which, rather than representing a half-twist switching two consecutive punctures of
Dn2 , give a half twist reversing the position of all punctures from the i-th to the j-th.
These generators are the ones used in [DW07].
For ψ ∈ Bn , denote
g∆ (ψ) := min{l|∃ a1 , . . . , al so that ψ = δ1a1 . . . δlal for some choice of δk ∈ ∆}.
Proposition 3.2.10. There is a constant A = A(n) such that the following is true.
Let ψ ∈ Bn ∼
= Mod(Dn2 ) be such that ψ defines a pseudo-Anosov mapping class on
2
int(Dn2 ). Let M := int(Dn ) × [0, 1]∼ψ be the related mapping torus. Then
vol(M ) =A lim sup
m→+∞

1
g∆ (ψ m )
m

and
vol(M ) =A

min
φ∈Conj(ψ)

g∆ (φ)

where Conj(ψ) is the conjugacy class of ψ in Bn .
Given Corollary 3.2.6, one produces the ≥A part of these two statements by constructing a braid word w = δ1a1 . . . δlal for ψ m (resp. for φ ∈ Conj(ψ)), with kβ r(m) k
(resp. kβ φ(r) k) ≥ l/3 − (2n + 1). More precisely, one constructs w−1 adapting the process described in [DW07], §2.4 to relax the strips of the strip decomposition. Given
the strip cutting sequence β r(m) (resp. β φ(r) ) for r a round pants decomposition,
the process describes how to apply, to each entry βj of the sequence, an element of
Mod(Dn2 ) which will turn it into a strip decomposition βj0 for a different pants decomposition, with the property that if α ∈ βj0 is a loop then #(α ∩ R) ≤ 2 while, if
s ∈ βj0 is a strip, then R(s) ∩ R is empty or connected. The diffeomorphism λ to be
applied to the last entry of β r(m) (resp. of β φ(r) ), which it just r(m) (resp. φ(r)), will
make it round. This does not mean that λ = ψ −m (resp. that λ = φ−1 ), but note
a

that the process gives a word w0 for λ having w = δ1a1 . . . δl0l0 for l0 ≤ 3kβ r(m) k (resp.
3kβ φ(r) k). Moreover, it is easy to realize that there is a further ν ∈ Mod(Dn2 ), with
g∆ (ν) ≤ 2n + 1, such that ν ◦ λ = ψ −m (resp. ν ◦ λ = φ−1 ).
The ≤A inequality does not depend on Corollary 3.2.6, but rather on a Gromov norm argument (see [TM79], §6 and in particular §6.5), based on a construction very similar to the one in [Lac04], §2. Given any φ ∈ Conj(ψ), one has
2
2
int(Dn2 ) × [0, 1]
= int(Dn ) × [0, 1]∼φ ; while int(Dn ) × [0, 1]∼ψm is an m-fold
∼ψ ∼
2
cyclic cover of int(Dn ) × [0, 1]∼ψ , hence the ratio between the respective volumes

183

is m.

2
So one may prove that, if int(Dn ) × [0, 1]∼ν for ν pseudo-Anosov, then

vol(M ) ≤A g∆ (ν). Both statements of the Corollary will follow, varying ν suitably.
Let w = δ a1 . . . δ al be a word in Bn which realizes g∆ (ν). Note that M ∼
= T \w
1

l

is also diffeomorphic to S3 \ (w ∪ L0 ), for L0 any meridian circle of ∂ T̄ . One may
a

regard w as subdivided into a number of braids, each corresponding to a factor δj j
(1 ≤ j ≤ l): encircle each of these braids with a further augmenting loop Lj , similarly
to what is done in [Lac04].
Given a disc Dj bounded by Lj in S3 , cut S3 \ (w ∪ L0 ∪ . . . ∪ Ll ) along Dj , twist
one of the two copies of Dj by a multiple of 2π and attach it back onto the other:
this is a homeomorphism. This property gives, in particular, S3 \ (w ∪ L0 ∪ . . . ∪ Ll ) ∼
=
S3 \ (w0 ∪ L0 ∪ . . . ∪ Ll ), where w0 = δ1ε1 . . . δlεl with each εj ∈ {0, 1}.
When W := w0 ∪ L0 ∪ . . . ∪ Ll is isotoped close to the equator of S3 to give a
link diagram, the decomposition of S3 \ W into two 3-cells with ideal vertices, as
shown in [BP92], §E.5-iv, may be refined, without adding any new vertices or ideal
vertices, into a triangulation of this manifold, as it is done in [Lac04]: the number of
triangles employed is linear in l, therefore the Gromov norm of S3 \ W is also at most
linear in l. But then so is the Gromov norm of S3 \ (w ∪ L0 ), which is obtained from
the former manifold by Dehn surgery (this is immediately implied by Proposition
6.5.2, Corollary 6.5.3 and Lemma 6.5.4 of [TM79]): and the latter is proportional to
vol (S3 \ (w ∪ L0 )). This ends the sketch of proof.

184

Bibliography
[Ada05] Colin Adams. Hyperbolic knots. Handbook of knot theory, pages 1–18, 2005.
[Ago]

Ian Agol. Lower bounds on volumes of hyperbolic Haken 3-manifolds, preprint.
arXiv preprint math.GT/9906182.

[Ago11] Ian Agol. Ideal triangulations of pseudo-Anosov mapping tori. Topology and geometry in dimension three, 560:1–17, 2011.
[AST07] Ian Agol, Peter Storm, and William Thurston. Lower bounds on volumes of
hyperbolic Haken 3-manifolds. Journal of the American Mathematical Society,
20(4):1053–1077, 2007.
[BH99] Martin R Bridson and André Haefliger. Metric spaces of non-positive curvature,
volume 319. Springer Science & Business Media, 1999.
[Bon02] Francis Bonahon. Geometric structures on 3-manifolds. Handbook of geometric
topology, 93164, 2002.
[Bow06] Brian H Bowditch. Intersection numbers and the hyperbolicity of the curve
complex. Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik (Crelles Journal),
2006(598):105–129, 2006.
[Bow14] Brian Bowditch. Uniform hyperbolicity of the curve graphs. Pacific Journal of
Mathematics, 269(2):269–280, 2014.
[BP92] Riccardo Benedetti and Carlo Petronio. Lectures on hyperbolic geometry. Springer,
1992.
[Bro03a] Jeffrey F. Brock. The Weil-Petersson metric and volumes of 3-dimensional hyperbolic convex cores. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 16:495–535, 2003.
[Bro03b] Jeffrey F. Brock. Weil-Petersson translation distance and volumes of mapping
tori. Communications in analysis and geometry, 11(5):987–1000, 2003.
[CB88] Andrew J Casson and Steven A Bleiler. Automorphisms of surfaces after Nielsen
and Thurston. Number 9. Cambridge University Press, 1988.
[CZ06]

Huai-Dong Cao and Xi-Ping Zhu. A complete proof of the Poincaré and geometrization conjectures-application of the Hamilton-Perelman theory of the Ricci flow.
Asian Journal of Mathematics, 10(2):165–492, 2006.

[Duc07] Moon Duchin. The curve complex and its relatives. 2007. Talk. http://www.math.
cornell.edu/∼vogtmann/MSRI/Duchin.pdf.
[DW03] Georgios Daskalopoulos and Richard Wentworth. Classification of Weil-Petersson
Isometries. American Journal of Mathematics, 125(4):941–975, 2003.
[DW07] Ivan Dynnikov and Bert Wiest. On the complexity of braids. Journal of the
European Mathematical Society, 9(4):801–840, 2007.

185

[FKP12] D. Futer, E. Kalfagianni, and J. Purcell. Guts of Surfaces and the Colored Jones
Polynomial. Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012.
[FLP12] Albert Fathi, François Laudenbach, and Valentin Poénaru. Thurston’s Work on
Surfaces (MN-48), volume 48. Princeton University Press, 2012.
[FM11] Benson Farb and Dan Margalit. A Primer on Mapping Class Groups (PMS-49).
Princeton Mathematical Series. Princeton University Press, 2011.
[Fri11]

Stefan Friedl. An introduction to 3-manifolds and their fundamental groups. 2011.
Lecture notes. http://www.uni-regensburg.de/Fakultaeten/nat Fak I/friedl/
papers/3-manifold-lecture-notes 072715.pdf.

[GS14]

V. Gadre and S. Schleimer. The curves not carried. ArXiv e-prints, October 2014.

[Ham06] Ursula Hamenstädt. Train tracks and the Gromov boundary of the complex of
curves. In Spaces of Kleinian groups, volume 329 of London Math. Soc. Lecture
Note Ser., pages 187–207. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2006.
[HPW15] Sebastian Hensel, Piotr Przytycki, and Richard CH Webb. 1-slim triangles and
uniform hyperbolicity for arc graphs and curve graphs. J. Eur. Math. Soc.(JEMS),
17(4):755–762, 2015.
[Iba09] K. Ibaraki. Train track complex of once-punctured torus and 4-punctured sphere.
ArXiv e-prints, January 2009.
[Kaw12] Akio Kawauchi. A survey of knot theory. Birkhäuser, 2012.
[Lac04] Marc Lackenby. The volume of hyperbolic alternating link complements. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 88(1):204–224, 2004.
[Lev83] Gilbert Levitt. Foliations and laminations on hyperbolic surfaces.
22(2):119–135, 1983.

Topology,

[MM99] Howard A Masur and Yair N Minsky. Geometry of the complex of curves I:
Hyperbolicity. Inventiones mathematicae, 138(1):103–149, 1999.
[MM00] Howard A Masur and Yair N Minsky. Geometry of the complex of curves II:
Hierarchical structure. Geometric and Functional Analysis, 10(4):902–974, 2000.
[MM04] Howard A. Masur and Yair N. Minsky. Quasiconvexity in the curve complex. In
In the tradition of Ahlfors and Bers, III, volume 355 of Contemp. Math., pages
309–320. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2004.
[MMS12] Howard Masur, Lee Mosher, and Saul Schleimer. On train-track splitting sequences. Duke Math. J., 161(9):1613–1656, 06 2012.
[Mos03] Lee Mosher. Train track expansions of measured foliations. 2003. Preprint.
andromeda.rutgers.edu/∼mosher/arationality 03 12 28.pdf.
[PH91] R. C. Penner and J. L. Harer. Combinatorics of Train Tracks. Number 125 in
Annals of Mathematics Studies. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1991.
[PP87] Athanase Papadopoulos and Robert Penner. A characterization of pseudo-Anosov
foliations. Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 130(2):359–377, 1987.
[Prz15] Piotr Przytycki. Arcs intersecting at most once. Geometric and Functional Analysis, 25(2):658–670, 2015.
[T+ 88] William P Thurston et al. On the geometry and dynamics of diffeomorphisms of
surfaces. Bulletin (new series) of the american mathematical society, 19(2):417–
431, 1988.

186

[Thu82] William Thurston. Hyperbolic geometry and 3-manifolds. Low-dimensional topology, 48:9–25, 1982.
[Thu98] W. P. Thurston. Hyperbolic Structures on 3-manifolds, II: Surface groups and 3manifolds which fiber over the circle. ArXiv Mathematics e-prints, January 1998.
[TM79] William P Thurston and John Willard Milnor. The geometry and topology of
three-manifolds. Princeton University Princeton, 1979.

187

