MANY HAKEN HEEGAARD SPLITTINGS

arXiv:1611.00066v2 [math.GT] 6 Aug 2018

ALESSANDRO SISTO
Abstract. We give a simple criterion for a Heegaard splitting to yield a
Haken manifold. As a consequence, we construct many Haken manifolds,
in particular homology spheres, with prescribed properties, namely Heegaard genus, Heegaard distance and Casson invariant.
Along the way we give simpler and shorter proofs of the existence
of splittings with specified Heegaard distance, originally proven by IdoJang-Kobayashi, of the existence of hyperbolic manifolds with prescribed
Casson invariant, originally due to Lubotzky-Maher-Wu, and of a result
about subsurface projections of disc sets (for which we even get better
constants), originally due to Masur-Schleimer.

1. Introduction
Every closed connected oriented 3–manifold admits a Heegaard splitting,
meaning that it can be obtained by gluing two handlebodies along their
boundaries. It is therefore interesting to understand what kind of information one can extract about the 3–manifold from the gluing map that defines
one of its Heegaard splittings. For example, in a seminal work Hempel
[Hem01] proved that if a 3–manifold is Seifert fibered or contains an incompressible torus then, for any Heegaard splitting, the distance between the
disc sets of the handlebodies in the curve graph of their common boundary,
which we will call Heegaard distance, is at most 2. In particular, because
of geometrisation, if a 3–manifold admits a Heegaard spitting of distance at
least 3 then it is hyperbolic.
In this paper, we study how the property of being Haken can be read off
the data coming from a Heegaard splitting.
(Recall that the surface S embedded in the 3–manifold M admits a compression disc if there exists an embedding f of the 2–disc D2 into M so
that f (∂D2 ) is an essential loop in S and f (D̊2 ) ⊆ M − S. A closed connected oriented 3–manifold is Haken if it is irreducible and it contains an
incompressible surface, i.e. an embedded connected orientable surface not
homeomorphic to the 2–sphere that does not admit a compression disc.)
We give a simple criterion for a Heegaard splitting to yield a Haken manifold (Theorem 3.3). Roughly speaking, the criterion applies when there is
a tight geodesic connecting the disc sets along which there are large subsurface projections at every point. We will provide an explicit construction of
an embedded surface (see Definition 3.1) starting from a path in the curve
1

MANY HAKEN HEEGAARD SPLITTINGS

2

graph with certain properties (specified in Definition 2.3), and then prove
that such surface does not admit compression discs.
It is relatively easy to construct splittings so that the criterion applies,
and in fact there is a lot of flexibility in doing so. In particular, we can
construct Haken manifolds, and in particular Haken homology spheres, that
satisfy a rather long list of prescribed properties:
Theorem 1.1. Let g, n and k be integers and suppose that either g, n ≥ 3.
Then there exists a closed oriented 3–manifold with the following properties:
• M is Haken,
• M is an integer homology sphere,
• M is hyperbolic,
• M has a Heegaard splitting of genus g and Heegaard distance n,
• M has Casson invariant k.
We emphasize that various subsets of those properties were not known to
be simultaneously realisable. In fact, for example, the first construction of
splittings of given Heegaard distance is given in [IJK14], but these are not
guaranteed to be neither Haken nor homology spheres. (There is a construction of Haken manifolds with splittings of arbitrarily large distance [Eva06],
see also [MMS07], but such manifolds have positive first Betti number.)
Also, the only previously known construction of hyperbolic manifolds with
given Casson invariant is the one in [LMW16], where the authors do not
obtain precise control on the Heegaard distance and do not show whether
their manifolds are Haken or not. In fact, our construction is shorter and
simpler than the ones in either of these papers, especially [LMW16], which
uses probabilistic methods.
Along the way, see Corollary 2.5, we also improve the bounds and give a
simpler proof of a useful result from [MS13] about subsurface projections of
disc sets.
Acknowledgement. This paper would have not been possible without the
contribution of Saul Schleimer, who provided precious suggestions and insights about the construction of the mapping classes in Section 4.
The author would also like to especially thank Jeff Brock for the discussions that lead to the idea for constructing incompressible surfaces, as well as
Sebastian Hensel, Joseph Maher, Kasra Rafi and Juan Souto for interesting
discussions.
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under grant No. DMS-1440140 while the author was in residence at
the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute in Berkeley, California, during
the Fall 2016 semester.
2. Steady paths
2.1. Background and conventions. We denote by Σg the closed connected oriented surface of genus g, and we will always assume g ≥ 2.

MANY HAKEN HEEGAARD SPLITTINGS

3

For short, we will write “curve” instead of “essential simple closed curve”
(recall that a curve is essential if it does not bound a disc or a once-punctured
disc). The curve graph C(Σg ) of Σg is the graph whose vertices are isotopy
classes of curves on Σg and where two curves are connected by an edge if
and only if they have disjoint representatives. With an abuse of notation,
when discussing properties of a set of curves we will implicitly assume that
they are in minimal position, and when referring to the distance between
two curves in C(Σg ) we will mean the distance between their isotopy classes.
We say that a subsurface of Σg is non-sporadic if it is not a sphere with
at most 4 discs removed or a torus with one disc removed. Similarly to
the above, given an essential non-sporadic subsurface Y of Σg we denote by
AC(Y ) the graph whose vertices are isotopy classes of curves and essential
simple arcs in Y (an arc is essential if it is does not cut out a disc), with
distance defined as above. For sporadic surfaces the definitions need to be
adjusted; we do not recall them here since this does not play a big role in
this paper, and we refer the reader to [MM99].
Curve graphs, as well as arc and curve graphs, are Gromov-hyperbolic
[MM99], see also [Aou13, Bow14, CRS15, HPW15, PS15]. (This fact only
plays a minor role in this paper.)
A multicurve is a collection of disjoint pairwise non-isotopic curves. Given
a multicurve c, we denote N (c) an open regular neighborhood.
2.1.1. Subsurface projections. We now recall some properties of subsurface
projections. The statement and proof of the criterion for being Haken do
not rely on this notion, but the construction of disc sets where the criterion
applies does. To the best of the author’s knowledge, the interaction between
subsurface projections and Heegaard splittings was first studied in [JMM10].
For Y an essential non-sporadic subsurface of Σg and a curve c in Σg ,
the subsurface projection πY (c) ⊆ AC(Y ) is obtained as follows. First,
one isotopes c so that it intersects ∂Y minimally. Then, one considers all
connected components of c ∩ Y , and defines πY (c) as the set of all isotopy
classes of arcs and curves that they represent. This is a set of diameter at
most 1 in AC(Y ). We will write dAC(Y ) (c, c0 ) for dAC(Y ) (πY (c), πY (c0 )).
One of the fundamental facts about surface projection, and one that we
will use repeatedly, is the Bounded Geodesic Image Theorem:
Theorem 2.1 (Bounded Geodesic Image Theorem, [MM00], see also [Web15]).
There exists C ≥ 0 with the following property. Let Y ⊆ Z be essential subsurfaces of Σg . If c0 , . . . , cn are curves that form a geodesic in AC(Z) and
πY (ci ) is non-empty for every Y , then dAC(Y ) (c0 , cn ) ≤ C.
The following is a well-known easy consequence of the Bounded Geodesic
Image Theorem.
Lemma 2.2. There exists K so that whenever c0 , . . . , cn is a sequence of
curves in an essential subsurface Y of Σg where consecutive curves are
disjoint and not isotopic, and dAC(Σg −N (ci )) (ci−1 , ci+1 ) ≥ K for all i =

MANY HAKEN HEEGAARD SPLITTINGS

4

1, . . . , n − 1, then any geodesic in AC(Y ) from c0 to cn contains all the
ci .
Proof. We let K = 2C+1, for C as in the Bounded Geodesic Image Theorem.
We argue by contradiction. Suppose that i ≥ 2 is minimal so that some
geodesic γ from c0 to ci does not contain ci−1 (for i = 1 the statement is obvious, and by minimality we only have to show that γ contains ci−1 ). Then
by the Bounded Geodesic Image Theorem we have dAC(Σg −N (ci )) (c0 , ci+1 ) ≤
C. However, we can also apply the same theorem to c0 , . . . , ci−1 and get
dAC(Σg −N (ci )) (c0 , ci−1 ) ≤ C. But then we would have dAC(Σg −N (ci )) (ci−1 , ci+1 ) ≤
2C, a contradiction.

2.2. Definition of steady paths. We will construct surfaces in Heegaard
splittings starting from paths (of multicurves) in the curve graph with certain properties described below. The key condition is a large links condition,
item 5.
The notion of steady path we describe below is related to the notion of
tight geodesics as defined in [MM99], and in particular for d large enough a
steady path is a tight geodesic (this fact does not get used in the proof of
the criterion for being Haken).
Definition 2.3. For D0 , D1 two sets of curves on Σg , where g ≥ 2, we say
that a sequence of multicurves t0 , . . . , tn is a (D0 , D1 , d)–steady path if
(1) the curves of the multicurve t0 (resp. tn ) are in D0 (resp. D1 ),
(2) whenever c ∈ ti , c0 ∈ ti+1 , we have that dC(Σg ) (c, c0 ) = 1,
(3) for every i 6= 0, 1 (resp. i 6= n − 1, n), every d ∈ D0 (resp. d ∈ D1 )
intersects ti ,
(4) every d ∈ D0 (resp. d ∈ D1 ) not in t0 (resp. tn ) intersects t0 ∪ t1
(resp. tn−1 ∪ tn ),
(5) dAC(Σg −N (ti )) (ti−1 , ti+1 ) ≥ d for all i = 1, . . . , n − 1.
2.3. Concatenations of arcs. The following lemma will be important to
rule out compression discs. Essentially, the loop ` describes the shape of
the boundary of a disc that we will encounter later in an argument by
contradiction. In that context, the first condition will be guaranteed by
Definition 2.3.5.
Lemma 2.4. Let Y be a compact surface with boundary. Then there does
not exist a homotopically trivial loop ` obtained by concatenating essential
arcs α1 , . . . , αk in Y such that:
• If i is even and j is odd then dAC(Y ) (αi , αj ) > 1 (i.e., the arcs
intersect essentially),
• αi is disjoint from αj when i ∼
= j(2) and i 6= j.
Proof. Consider a loop ` obtained concatenating arcs as in the statement.
We can assume that the αi are in minimal position relative to their endpoints, i.e. that they do not form bigons.

MANY HAKEN HEEGAARD SPLITTINGS

5

Consider a lift `˜ of ` in the universal cover Ỹ of Y . The goal is to show
that `˜ is not a loop. Denote by α̃i the lifts of the αi that concatenate to
˜
form `.
The key facts that we will use are that
(1) each lift of an αi separates Ỹ ,
(2) α̃i intersects some lift of αj in its interior if and only if i ∼
6 j(2), and
=
(3) if a lift of αi intersects a lift of αj , then it does so in one point.
(The third item follows from minimal position.)
Notice that the number
S of arcs k is at least 2. Let n be even so that the
interior of αn intersects m odd αm in the minimal number of points among
all even n. For i odd, let α̃ni be a lift of αn that intersects α̃i in its interior.
We are going to show that the α̃ni are all disjoint. This implies that the
endpoints of `˜ are on opposite sides of, say, α̃n1 (since traveling along `˜ one
crosses all the α̃ni exactly once). Hence, this ensures that `˜ is not a loop.
Suppose by contradiction that two α̃ni coincide (notice that two lifts of
αn are disjoint if and only if they do not coincide). We can then consider
distinct odd indices i, j so that α̃ni intersects α̃j and |i − j| is minimal. Then
|i − j| = 2. In fact, if, say, i ≥ j + 4 then α̃ni+2 would intersect α̃j 0 for j 0 = i
or i + 2 < j 0 ≤ j, as suggested in Figure 1. More precisely, the intersection
points of α̃ni with α̃i and α̃j lie in the same connected component of Ỹ − α̃ni+2
because distinct lifts of αn do not intersect, while the endpoints of α̃i+2 lie
in different connected components.

Figure 1. α̃ni+2 cannot cross α̃ni (here j = i + 4).

Now, it is readily seen that all lifts of αm , m odd, that intersect α̃i+1 in
its interior also intersect α̃ni in its interior, see Figure 2. In fact, for any such
lift α̃, the intersection points of α̃ni with αi and αi+2 each lie in the same
connected component of Ỹ − α̃ as one of the endpoints of α̃i+1 .
Moreover, α̃ni also intersects in its interior two more lifts of some αm ,
namely α̃i and α̃i+2S. From this we deduce that the interior of αi+1 has fewer
intersections with m odd αm than the interior of αn , a contradiction.

2.4. Digression: Subsurface projection of discs. We point out that
Lemma 2.4, besides being a key point in the proof of Theorem 3.3 below,
also gives a significantly simpler proof of a useful lemma about subsurface

MANY HAKEN HEEGAARD SPLITTINGS

6

Figure 2. α̃ is a lift of αm for some odd m. If it
crosses α̃i+1 , it must also cross α̃ni .

projection of discs originally due to Masur-Schleimer [MS13] (which we need
later). In fact, we improve the constants given by Masur-Schleimer (in this
paper we measure distances between projection sets rather than diameters
as in [MS13]; using the conventions of [MS13] we should replace “1” by “3”
in both conclusions below).
In the statement we use the notions of arc graph A(X) of a surface with
boundary X, that is defined similarly to the arc and curve graph using arcs
only. Distances in the arc graph can be much larger than corresponding
distances in the arc and curve graph, though, so the statement in terms of
the arc graph is more refined than the corresponding statement in terms of
the arc and curve graph.
Corollary 2.5. (cfr. [MS13, Lemma 12.20]) Let F be a compact surface
with boundary (orientable or non-orientable) and let the handlebody H be
the orientable [0, 1]–bundle of F . Then for every essential curve d of ∂H
that bounds a disc of H the following holds.
• If F is orientable, and hence H = F × [0, 1], let X = F × {0}, Y =
F × {1} and let τ : X → Y be the involution that switches the
endpoints of the fibers. Then
dA(X) (πX (d), τ (πY (d))) ≤ 1.
• If F is non-orientable, let X = ∂H −(∂X ×(0, 1)) and let τ : X → X
be the involution that switches the endpoints of the fibers. Then
dA(X) (πX (d), τ (πX (d))) ≤ 1.
Moreover, πX (d) lies within distance 1 in AC(X) from a multicurve
fixed by τ .
Proof. Applying an isotopy, me can make sure that d consists of a union
of arcs each of which is either an essential arc of X or Y or a fiber over a
boundary point of F . We can then disregard the arcs of the second type and
have a sequence α10 , . . . , αk0 of arcs alternately in X and Y in the orientable
case, and just in X in the non-orientable case. Now, the arcs αi = τ i (αi0 )

MANY HAKEN HEEGAARD SPLITTINGS

7

concatenate to form a homotopically trivial loop (in both cases, the inclusion
of X in H is π1 –injective). By Lemma 2.4, we get that some αi for i odd
needs to be disjoint from αj with j even. This translates into the conditions
described in the statement of the corollary.
To get the conclusion about the fixed multicurve, consider some αi0 which
is disjoint from some τ (αj0 ). Then the subsurface Z filled by αi0 and τ (αi0 ) is
not the whole surface, and the set of essential curves in ∂Z form the required
multicurve.

3. Steady surfaces
3.1. Heegaard splittings. We denote by Hg the oriented handlebody of
genus g, and we identify Σg = ∂Hg . A Heegaard splitting H(φ), where
φ : ∂Hg → Σg is a homeomorphism, is the 3–manifold denote M (φ) obtained
gluing two copies Hg0 , Hg1 of Hg to the boundary components Σg × {0}, Σg ×
{1} of Σg × [0, 1] using, respectively, the identity ∂Hg0 → Σg and φ : ∂Hg1 →
Σg .1 We can then define the disc set Di , for i = 0, 1, as the set of all isotopy
classes of curves on Σg that bound a disc in the handlebody attached to
Σg × {i}.
We say that the Heegaard distance of H(φ) is the distance in the curve
graph of Σg between the disc sets.
Definition 3.1. Let H(φ) be a Heegaard splitting with Heegaard distance
at least 2.
A d–steady surface in M = M (φ) is any embedded surface S in M
constructed in the following way. Let t0 , . . . , tn be a (D0 , D1 , d)–steady
path. Choose open regular neighborhoods N (ti ) of the multicurves ti , with
N (ti ) ∩ N (ti+1 ) = ∅. Finally, let S be the union of
• a union of disjoint discs in Hg0 (resp. Hg1 ) with boundary ∂N (t0 )
(resp. ∂N (tn )),


• surfaces Si = Si0 × {i/(n + 1)}, where Si0 = Σg \ N (ti ) ∪ N (ti−1 ) ,
for i = 1, . . . , n,
• the unions of annuli Ai = ∂N (ti ) × [i/(n + 1), (i + 1)/(n + 1)], for
i = 0, . . . , n − 1.
We remark that steady surfaces are orientable.
It is easy to give conditions for a steady surface to have a connected
component which is not a sphere, for example:
Lemma 3.2. Suppose that t0 , . . . , tn is a steady path for the surface Σg
defining the steady surface surface S. If either g ≥ 3, n ≥ 3 or g ≥ 2, n ≥ 4,
and t1 , tn−1 consist of a single curve, then S has a connected component
which is not a sphere.
1This always yields an orientable manifold; in order to obtain a 3-manifold and an
orientation on it, we could insist that φ is orientation-preserving and reverse the orientation
of one of the handlebodies.

MANY HAKEN HEEGAARD SPLITTINGS

8

Proof. We use the notation of Definition 3.1. Consider the subsurface S 0
consisting of the union of all Si with i 6= 1, n and the annuli Ai for i =
2, . . . , n−2 (no annuli if n = 3). The Euler characteristic of S 0 is (2−2g)(n−
2), and S 0 has 4 boundary components. Under both sets of assumptions on
(g, n), we can conclude that S 0 has positive genus, and hence one connected
component of S is not a sphere.

Finally, we prove the key result to construct Haken manifolds from Heegaard splittings.
Theorem 3.3. Let H(φ) be a Heegaard splitting with g ≥ 2 of distance at
least 2. If S is a 5–steady surface in M = M (φ), then S does not admit a
compression disc.
Proof. We use the notation of Definition 3.1. Suppose by contradiction that
the steady surface S admits a compression disc D. We now isotope D in a
suitable normal form in a few steps.
First of all, applying an isotopy we can assume that the boundary of D
is either
(1) a simple loop contained in some Si , or
(2) a union of essential arcs in the Si , that we call vertical arcs, and arcs
in the Ai of the form {p} × [i/(n + 1), (i + 1)/(n + 1)], that we call
horizontal arcs.
This is just because we can remove inessential arcs in the various ∂D ∩ Si
and ∂D ∩ Ai starting from innermost ones.
Moreover, we will consider:
(1) simple loops in D̊ which are connected components of the intersecS
tion of D̊ and Σg = Σg × {i/(n + 1)}. We call these intersection
loops.
(2) simple arcs in D whose interior is a connected component of the
intersection of D̊ and Σg . We call these intersection arcs.
We can assume that there are finitely many intersection loops and intersection arcs.
Ruling out intersection loops. We now argue that we can isotope D to
remove intersection loops and that case 1 does not occur. Consider an
innermost intersection loop ` and suppose that it is contained in Si . If `
bounds a disc in Si then a simple surgery arguments allows us to replace
D by a disc that has fewer loops in the intersection with Σg , hence we can
assume that ` is essential in Σg × {i/(n + 1)} (we are not ruling out that it
is parallel into the boundary of Si , for now). Notice that the subdisc of D
bounded by ` does not intersect one of the handlebodies and hence, when
identifying Σg × {i/(n + 1)} with Σg , we have ` ∈ D0 ∪ D1 . Definition 2.3.3
rules out that ` is contained in Si for i 6= 1, n, so that ` is contained in S1
or Sn . But then Definition 2.3.4 implies that ` is parallel to a component
of t0 × {1/(n + 1)} or tn × {n/(n + 1)}, which bound discs in S. Hence, we

MANY HAKEN HEEGAARD SPLITTINGS

9

can once again replace D with a disc that has fewer loops in the intersection
with Σg .
We can then go on and remove all loops in D̊ ∩ Σg , and finally a very
similar argument proves that case 1 does not occur because otherwise ∂D
would not be essential in S.
Cutting up D. We now have that there are no intersection loops, just
intersection arcs. The intersection arcs subdivide D into finitely many closed
(polygonal) regions. The Euler characteristic of D equals the number of
such regions minus the number of intersection arcs. We are now going to
argue that each region contains at least two intersection arcs, leading to a
contradiction.
In fact, suppose that a region R contains only one intersection arc α, say
contained in Si . The closure of ∂R−α is an arc β contained in ∂D, and hence
it is a concatenation of (alternately) horizontal and vertical arcs. Moreover,
the vertical arcs are all contained in either Si ∪Si+1 or Si−1 ∪Si , for otherwise
the interior of R would have to intersect either Si−1 or Si+1 . Since R is
contained in Σg times an interval, we can then project ∂R to the factor Σg ,
and obtain a concatenation of paths as described in Lemma 2.4 (notice that
an arc in Σg − N (ti ) disjoint from ti−1 intersects any arc in Σg − N (ti ) that
intersects ti+1 at most once since dAC(Σg −N (ti )) (ti−1 , ti+1 ) ≥ 5). However,
such concatenation is homotopically trivial because we can also project R,
a contradiction.

4. Construction of Haken manifolds
4.1. Fixing gluing maps. Fix a genus g ≥ 3. Then the handlebody Hg of
genus g can be identified with the product F × [0, 1], where F is a sphere
with at least 4 discs removed. We denote by σ0 , σ1 the core curves of two
connected components of ∂F × [0, 1]. We claim that there exists a Heegaard
splitting H(ι = ι1 ◦ ι2 ) of the sphere S 3 so that ιi ∈ Stab(σi ). In fact,
there is a curve c on ∂Hg that bounds a disc and separates σ1 from σ2 ; just
consider the product of an arc in F that separates the components of ∂F
corresponding to σ1 , σ2 , and take the product with [0, 1]. Now, the usual
gluing map that exchanges meridian and longitudes can be written as a
product of two homeomorphisms that each restrict to the identity on one
component of the complement of c, as required.
Denote by D the disc set of Hg , so that the disc sets associated to the
Heegaard splitting are D and ι(D).
We fix the data described in this subsection from now on.
4.2. Constructing large partial pseudo-Anosovs. Let K be the subgroup of M CG(Σg ) generated by Dehn twists around separating curves. By
[Mor97], there is a homomorphism J : K → Z so that, for all φ ∈ K, the
Casson invariant of H(ι ◦ ψ) is J(ψ).

MANY HAKEN HEEGAARD SPLITTINGS

10

Lemma 4.1. For i = 0, 1 the following holds. For every L there exists
φi ∈ K∩Stab(σi ) so that J(φi ) = 1, φi has a geodesic axis in AC(Σg −N (σi )),
and the translation distance of φ is at least L.
Proof. It is proven in [LMW16, Lemma 5] that there is a Dehn twist τc
around a separating curve so that J(τc ) = 1. In fact, they obtain c as
follows. First, they embed a trefoil knot on a Heegaard surface of genus 2 in
S 3 (see [LMW16, Figure 2]), and then they stabilise the Heegaard splitting,
using stabilisations disjoint from such embedding, to get a curve c on a
Heegaard surface of the required genus. Up to isotopy, σi is contained in
one of the solid tori that one connect-sums to the Heegaard surface of genus
2 to stabilise (recall that we are dealing with the case of genus at least 3).
In particular, one can ensure that c is contained in Σg − N (σi ).
Set c1 = c and let c2 be of the form k(c1 ) for some k ∈ K and with
the property that c1 and c2 are at least L + 2 apart from each other in
AC(Σg − N (σi )).
We now consider any product φi of sufficiently large powers of the τcj . In
order to construct a geodesic axis for φi , there is a standard procedure (see
the proof of [Man13, Proposition 3.3], and in particular [Man13, Lemma
3.10]): One starts from geodesics connecting the cj , takes subgeodesics connecting curves disjoint from the cj , starts “rotating” these using the τcj and
takes concatenations. It is now easy to use the Bounded Geodesic Image
Theorem, similarly to Lemma 2.2, to show that such concatenation is a
geodesic line, and that the translation distance is at least L (we have not
recalled the definition of the arc graph of an annulus, but the only fact about
it that is needed for this construction is that the corresponding Dehn twist
acts with positive translation length).
Finally, choosing the powers of the τcj suitably, we can further ensure
J(φi ) = 1, as required.

4.3. Moving σi off the disc set.
Lemma 4.2. For i = 0, 1 and for every d, there exists φi ∈ K ∩ Stab(σi )
with J(φi ) = 1 so that for every integer k 6= 0 we have
dAC(Σg −N (σi )) (D, φki (σi+1 )) ≥ d,
dAC(Σg −N (σi )) (D, φki ιi (σi+1 )) ≥ d.
Proof. We give the proof for genus at least 3 first.
Let L, R be large enough constants to be determined later.
Let φi be as in Lemma 4.1. Let X = F × {0}, Y = F × {1}. We can
conjugate φi to ensure every curve along the axis γ of φi cuts ∂X and ∂Y .
By conjugating φi by a large pseudo-Anosov of X, and keeping into account
that the entire axis of γ has bounded projection onto AC(X) and AC(Y ),
we can then ensure that, identifying X, Y with F , for every curve c on γ we
have dAC(F ) (πX (c), πY (c)) ≥ R.

MANY HAKEN HEEGAARD SPLITTINGS

11

Notice that φki (σi+1 ) has closest point projection to γ far away from
that of ∂X. If there was c ∈ D so that dC(Σg −N (σi )) (c, φki (σi+1 )) is small,
then, by a simple Gromov-hyperbolicity argument, we would have a geodesic from πΣg −N (σi )) (c) to γ that stays far from ∂X and ∂Y . Hence,
dAC(F ) (πX (c), πY (c)) would be large, contradicting Corollary 2.5. A similar argument holds for φki (ιi (σi+1 )), which lies within uniformly bounded
distance of φki (σi+1 ).

Figure 3. Picture in C(Σg − N (σi )).

For genus 2, the proof is similar. In this case we let X be the double cover
of F contained in ∂H2 . We can conjugate φi so that its axis has bounded
projection onto AC(X). Furthermore, since the Möbius strip with one disc
removed has bounded curve graph, we can make sure that such projection
lies far away from multicurves fixed by τ , where τ is the involution described
in Corollary 2.5 (in the notation of the corollary, there is a natural correspondence between multicurves fixed by τ and multicurves of F ). Finally,
we can show that if the projection to AC(Σg − N (σi )) of some d ∈ D was
close to either of φki (σi+1 ) or φki (ιi σi+1 ), then its projection to X would be
far away from the fixed set of τ , contradicting Corollary 2.5.

4.4. Constructing steady paths.
Lemma 4.3. Fix a large enough d and let φi be as in Lemma 4.2.
Let n ≥ 2 and let k1 , . . . , kn be nonzero integers. Let ψ be the product,
with indices modulo 2,
ψ = (φk11 ι1 )(φk22 ι2 )

n
Y

φki i .

i=3

Then there exists a (D, ψ(D), d)–steady path t0 , . . . , tn with ti consisting of
a single curve for i =
6 0, n. Moreover, dC(Σg ) (D, ψ(D)) = n + 1.
Proof. Let φ01 = φk11 ι1 , φ02 = φk22 ι2 and φ0i = φki i for i ≥ 3.
Q
For k ≥ 3, let ψk = ki=1 φ0i . Let ti = ψi−1 σi = ψi σi for i = 1, . . . , n.
Also, let t0 ⊆ D (resp. tn+1 ⊆ ψ(D)) be a maximal collection of pairwise
disjoint curves disjoint from t1 (resp. tn ).
All conditions of Definition 2.3 except for item 3 can be easily verified
directly. To verify item 3 we just need to observe that, provided d is large
enough, for every d ∈ D, every geodesic from d to ti , i ≥ 2, contains

MANY HAKEN HEEGAARD SPLITTINGS

12

t1 , . . . , ti−1 by Lemma 2.2, and similarly for d0 ∈ ψ(D). Also, any geodesic from D to ψ(D) contains t1 , . . . , tn , proving dC(Σg ) (D, ψ(D)) = n + 1
(since dC(Σg ) (D, ψ(D)) ≤ n + 1 because t0 , . . . , tn+1 form a path).

4.5. Proof of Theorem 1.1. Fix g, n and k as in the statement of the
theorem. By Lemma 4.3, we can construct a Heegaard splitting H(ψ) so
that the two disc sets D0 , D1 in C(Σg ) are at distance exactly n, and they are
connected by a (D0 , D1 , 5)–steady path with t1 , tn−1 consisting of a single
curve. Hence the resulting manifold M (ψ) is Haken by Theorem 3.3 and
Lemma 3.2 (notice that if a possibly disconnected surface does not admit
a compression disc then none of its components do). Moreover ψ = ιφ
for some φ ∈ K (since K is normal), so that M (ψ) is an integer homology
sphere and by choosing the exponents ki in Lemma 4.3, we can make sure
that J(φ) = k, i.e. that the Casson invariant of M (ψ) is k.
Since the Heegaard splitting has distance at least 3, the resulting manifold
is hyperbolic by results in [Hem01] and Thurston’s hyperbolisation.

References
[Aou13]
[Bow14]
[CRS15]

[Eva06]
[Hem01]
[HPW15]

[IJK14]
[JMM10]
[LMW16]

[Man13]
[MM99]
[MM00]
[MMS07]
[Mor97]

Tarik Aougab. Uniform hyperbolicity of the graphs of curves. Geometry &
Topology, 17(5):2855–2875, 2013.
Brian H. Bowditch. Uniform hyperbolicity of the curve graphs. Pacific J. Math,
269(2):269–280, 2014.
Matt Clay, Kasra Rafi, and Saul Schleimer. Uniform hyperbolicity of the curve
graph via surgery sequences. Algebraic and Geometric Topology, 14(6):3325–
3344, 2015.
Tatiana Evans. High distance Heegaard splittings of 3-manifolds. Topology
Appl., 153(14):2631–2647, 2006.
John Hempel. 3-manifolds as viewed from the curve complex. Topology,
40(3):631–657, 2001.
Sebastian Hensel, Piotr Przytycki, and Richard C. H. Webb. 1-slim triangles
and uniform hyperbolicity for arc graphs and curve graphs. J. Eur. Math. Soc.
(JEMS), 17(4):755–762, 2015.
Ayako Ido, Yeonhee Jang, and Tsuyoshi Kobayashi. Heegaard splittings of distance exactly n. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 14(3):1395–1411, 2014.
Jesse Johnson, Yair Minsky, and Yoav Moriah. Heegaard splittings with large
subsurface distances. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 10(4):2251–2275, 2010.
Alexander Lubotzky, Joseph Maher, and Conan Wu. Random methods
in 3-manifold theory. Proceedings of the Steklov Institute of Mathematics,
292(1):118–142, 2016.
Johanna Mangahas. A recipe for short-word pseudo-Anosovs. Amer. J. Math.,
135(4):1087–1116, 2013.
Howard A Masur and Yair N Minsky. Geometry of the complex of curves I:
Hyperbolicity. Inventiones mathematicae, 138(1):103–149, 1999.
Howard A Masur and Yair N Minsky. Geometry of the complex of curves II: Hierarchical structure. Geometric and Functional Analysis, 10(4):902–974, 2000.
Yair N. Minsky, Yoav Moriah, and Saul Schleimer. High distance knots. Algebr.
Geom. Topol., 7:1471–1483, 2007.
Shigeyuki Morita. Casson invariant, signature defect of framed manifolds and
the secondary characteristic classes of surface bundles. J. Differential Geom.,
47(3):560–599, 1997.

MANY HAKEN HEEGAARD SPLITTINGS

[MS13]
[PS15]

[Web15]

13

Howard Masur and Saul Schleimer. The geometry of the disk complex. J. Amer.
Math. Soc., 26(1):1–62, 2013.
Piotr Przytycki and Alessandro Sisto. A note on acylindrical hyperbolicity of
mapping class groups. Proceedings of the 7th MSJ-SI, Hyperbolic Geometry and
Geometric Group Theory, to appear, 2015.
Richard C. H. Webb. Uniform bounds for bounded geodesic image theorems.
J. Reine Angew. Math., 709:219–228, 2015.

Department of Mathematics, ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland
E-mail address: sisto@math.ethz.ch

