INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED
THREE-MANIFOLDS

arXiv:1704.02020v3 [math.GT] 13 Aug 2017

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU
Abstract. We compute the involutive Heegaard Floer homology of the family of threemanifolds obtained by plumbings along almost-rational graphs. (This includes all Seifert
fibered homology spheres.) We also study the involutive Heegaard Floer homology of connected sums of such three-manifolds, and explicitly determine the involutive correction terms
in the case that all of the summands have the same orientation. Using these calculations,
we give a new proof of the existence of an infinite-rank subgroup in the three-dimensional
homology cobordism group.

1. Introduction
In [8], Hendricks and the second author defined an invariant of three-manifolds called involutive Heegaard Floer homology. This is a variation of the well-known Heegaard Floer homology
of Ozsváth and Szabó [21, 20], taking into account the conjugation action ι on the Heegaard
Floer complex. Specifically, let CF ˝ pY, sq denote any of the four flavors of the Heegaard Floer
complex (with ˝ “ p, `, ´, or 8), for a three-manifold Y with a self-conjugate spinc structure
s. The Heegaard Floer complex is constructed starting from a Heegaard diagram for Y . The
conjugation ι is induced by reversing the orientation of the Heegaard surface and swapping
the alpha and beta curves, and observing that the result is also a Heegaard diagram for Y ,
which can be related to the original one by a sequence of Heegaard moves. The corresponding
involutive Heegaard Floer homology HFI ˝ pY, sq is the homology of the mapping cone
(1)

Qp1`ιq

CF ˝ pY, sq ÝÝÝÝÝÝÑ Q¨CF ˝ pY, sqr´1s.

This is a module over the ring R “ FrQ, U s{pQ2 q, where F denotes the field of two elements.
The construction of involutive Heegaard Floer homology was inspired by developments in
gauge theory [13, 12, 25]. Indeed, in the case when Y is a rational homology sphere, HFI ` pY, sq
is conjectured to be isomorphic to the Z4 -equivariant Seiberg-Witten Floer homology of the
pair pY, sq. Just as Heegaard Floer homology is more amenable to computations than SeibergWitten theory, involutive Heegaard Floer homology should be easier to calculate than its
gauge-theoretic counterpart. So far, HFI ˝ was computed in [8] for large surgeries on L-space
and thin knots (including many hyperbolic examples); see also [3] for related applications.
Moreover, a formula for HFI ˝ of connected sums was established in [9].
The purpose of this paper is to compute HFI ˝ for the class of rational homology spheres introduced by Némethi in [14], namely those associated to plumbings along AR (almost-rational)
graphs. For the sake of the exposition, we will focus on the minus version, HFI ´ .
If G is a weighted graph, let us denote by Y pGq the boundary of the corresponding plumbing
of two-spheres. In [19], Ozsváth and Szabó calculated the Heegaard Floer homology of Y pGq
when G is a negative definite graph with at most one bad vertex. (In particular, if a rational
homology sphere Y is Seifert fibered over a base orbifold with underlying space S 2 , then
ID was partially supported by NSF grant DGE-1148900.
CM was partially supported by NSF grant DMS-1402914.
1

2

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

Y can be expressed as Y pGq for such a graph G.) In [14], Némethi defined AR graphs as
those obtained from a rational graph by increasing the decoration of at most one vertex. We
will call the resulting manifolds AR plumbed three-manifolds, for simplicity. They include
those considered by Ozsváth and Szabó in [19], as well as the links of rational and weakly
elliptic singularities. Further, extending the work of [19], Némethi computed the Heegaard
Floer homology of AR plumbed three-manifolds. Specifically, to each plumbing graph G and
characteristic element k one can associate a decorated infinite tree Rk , called a graded root. To
Rk one can associate, in a combinatorial fashion, a lattice homology group H´ pG, kq “ H´ pRk q.
Némethi’s result, phrased in terms of the minus rather than the plus flavor, is that
HF ´ pY pGq, rksq – H´ pRk qrσ ` 2s.
Here, rks denotes the spinc stucture on Y pGq associated to k, and σ ` 2 denotes a grading
shift,1 where σ “ ´p|G| ` k 2 q{4.
To understand the involutive Heegaard Floer homology, we focus on self-conjugate rks.
In that case, there is a natural involution J0 on H´ pRk q (and hence on its grading-shifted
counterpart), coming from reflecting the graded root along its vertical axis.
Theorem 1.1. Let Y “ Y pGq be the plumbed three-manifold associated to an AR graph G,
and oriented as the boundary of the plumbing. Let s “ rks be a self-conjugate spinc structure
on Y . Let also Rk be the graded root associated to pG, kq, and let J0 be the reflection involution
on the lattice homology H´ pRk qrσ ` 2s.
Then, we have an isomorphism of graded FrU s-modules
HFI ´ pY, sq – kerp1 ` J0 qr´1s ‘ cokerp1 ` J0 q.
Under this isomorphism, the action of Q on HFI ´ pY, sq is given by the quotient map
kerp1 ` J0 q Ñ kerp1 ` J0 q{ imp1 ` J0 q Ď cokerp1 ` J0 q.
The main sources of applications for involutive Heegaard Floer homology are the involutive
¯ sq, the analogues of the Ozsváth-Szabó correction term dpY, sq
correction terms dpY, sq and dpY,
defined in [18]. In [8], it is shown that d and d¯ can be used to constrain the intersection forms
of spin four-manifolds with boundary, and the existence of homology cobordisms between
three-manifolds.
For the class of plumbed three-manifolds studied in this paper, we have the following result.
Theorem 1.2. Let Y and s be as in Theorem 1.1. Then, the involutive Heegaard Floer
correction terms are given by
¯ sq “ dpY, sq,
dpY, sq “ ´2µ̄pY, sq, dpY,
where dpY, sq is the Ozsváth-Szabó d-invariant and µ̄pY, sq is the Neumann-Siebenmann invariant from [17], [23].
Theorems 1.1 and 1.2 should be compared with the corresponding results for Pinp2q-monopole
Floer homology, obtained by the first author in [5]. For the smaller class of rational homology
spheres Seifert fibered over a base orbifold with underlying space S 2 , the Pinp2q-equivariant
Seiberg-Witten Floer homology was computed by Stoffregen in [25].
The proof of Theorem 1.1 is in two steps. First, we identify the action of J0 on H´ pRk q
(or, more precisely, H´ pRk qrσ ` 2sq with the conjugation involution on HF ´ pY, sq, using an
argument from [5]. Second, we prove that, in the case at hand, the action of J0 on H´ pRk q
1In this paper, by ras we will denote a grading shift by a, so that an element in degree 0 in a module M

becomes an element in degree ´a in the shifted module M ras. This is the standard convention, but opposite to
the one in [14].

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

3

determines (up to chain homotopy) the underlying action at the chain level, on any free chain
complex that computes H´ pRk q. This allows us not only to compute the involutive Heegaard
Floer homology, but also to characterize the pair pCF ´ pY, sq, ιq up to the notion of equivalence
considered in [9, Definition 8.3].
The equivalence class of pCF ´ , ιq is the input needed for the connected sum formula in
involutive Heegaard Floer homology proved in [9]. Thus, we can use that formula to calculate
HFI ´ for connected sums of AR plumbed three-manifolds. In this paper we will focus on
explicitly calculating the involutive correction terms for such manifolds. To compute the
correction terms we only need to understand the pair pCF ´ , ιq up to a weaker equivalence
relation, called local equivalence; cf. [9, Definition 8.5].
As we prove in Sections 6 and 8.1, for an AR plumbed manifold Y with self-conjugate spinc
structure s, the local equivalence class of pCF ´ pY, sq, ιq is characterized by 2n quantities
d1 pY, sq ą d2 pY, sq ą ¨ ¨ ¨ ą dn pY, sq,
µ̄1 pY, sq ą µ̄2 pY, sq ą ¨ ¨ ¨ ą µ̄n pY, sq,
where d1 “ d is the Ozsváth-Szabó correction term and µ̄n “ µ̄ is the Neumann-Siebenmann
invariant. The values of di , µ̄i can be read from the graded root Rk associated to pY, sq.
Specifically, these values describe a simplified graded root, called monotone, which is obtained
from Rk by deleting some branches according to a certain algorithm.
We refer to the integer n above (the number of quantities di ) as the local complexity of
pY, sq. In particular, having local complexity one is the same as the projective type condition
introduced by Stoffregen in [25, Section 5.2].
It will be convenient to also define
2δ̃i pY, sq “ di pY, sq ` 2µ̄i pY, sq,

2δ̃pY, sq “ dpY, sq ` 2µ̄pY, sq.

Theorem 1.3. Let Y1 , . . . , Yk be AR plumbed three-manifolds, oriented as the boundaries of
those plumbings, and equipped with self-conjugate spinc structures s1 , . . . , sk . Suppose that
pYi , si q has local complexity ni .
paq We have
¯ 1 # . . . #Yk , s1 # . . . #sk q “ dpY1 # . . . #Yk , s1 # . . . #sk q “
dpY

k
ÿ

dpYi , si q.

i“1

pbq For each tuple of integers ps1 , . . . , sk q with 1 ď si ď ni , define
˜
¸
k
´
¯
ÿ
N ps1 , . . . , sk q “
dsi pYi , si q ´ max 2δ̃si pYi , si q .
i“1

i

Then
dpY1 # . . . #Yk , s1 # . . . #sk q “ max N ps1 , . . . , sk q.
ps1 ,...,sk q

where the maximum is taken over all tuples ps1 , . . . , sk q with 1 ď si ď ni .
Part (b) of Theorem 1.3 has the following consequence.
Corollary 1.4. Let pYi , si q be as in Theorem 1.3. Without loss of generality, assume that
δ̃pY1 , s1 q ď ¨ ¨ ¨ ď δ̃pYk , sk q.
Then:
(2)

dpY1 # . . . #Yk , s1 # . . . #sk q ď

´k´1
ÿ
i“1

k
¯
´k´1
¯
ÿ
ÿ
dpYi , si q ´ 2µ̄pYk , sk q “ 2
δ̃i ´
µ̄pYi , si q .
i“1

i“1

4

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

Moreover, if pYi , si q are all of projective type, then we have equality in (2).
In [24, Theorem 1.4], Stoffregen calculated the homology cobordism invariants α, β, γ (coming from Pinp2q-equivariant Seiberg-Witten Floer homology, cf. [13]) in the case of connected
sums of Seifert fibered integral homology spheres of projective type. Corollary 1.4 implies that
d “ 2β or 2β ´ 2 for those manifolds.
In a different direction, we can specialize Theorem 1.3 to the case of self-connected sums
#k pY, sq. In that case, the expression for d simplifies significantly. Indeed, the following
corollary shows that d satisfies a curious “stabilization” property for self-connected sums of
AR manifolds. More precisely, it turns out that for k sufficiently large, dp#k pY, sqq is a linear
function of k:
Corollary 1.5. Let Y be an AR plumbed three-manifold and let s be a self-conjugate spinc
structure on Y . Then
´
¯
dp#k pY, sqq “ max k ¨ di pY, sq ´ 2δ̃i pY, sq .
i

Moreover, for all k sufficiently large, this is equal to k ¨ dpY, sq ´ 2δ̃1 pY, sq.
Corollary 1.5 should be compared with Theorem 1.3 of [24], which shows that for α, β, and
γ, the difference βp#k pY, sqq ´ k ¨ dpY, sq (for example) is a bounded function of k. Here, in
the case of AR manifolds, we have the stronger result that for d¯ and d, the corresponding
¯ and ´2δ̃1 pY, sq for d).
expressions are eventually constant (namely, identically zero for d,
´
We can also study HFI for connected sums of AR plumbed three-manifolds, when some of
these manifolds are equipped with the opposite orientation. Recall that in [9] such a connected
sum (of large surgeries on torus knots) was used to give an example of a Z2 -homology sphere
with d, d and d¯ all different. Using the methods of this paper, we can now find an integral
homology sphere with the same property.
Theorem 1.6. Consider the integral homology 3-sphere
3
3
Y “ S´1
pT2,7 q#S´1
pT2,7 q#S13 p´T2,11 q “ Σp2, 7, 15q#Σp2, 7, 15q# ´ Σp2, 11, 23q.

Then, we have
¯ q “ 2.
dpY q “ ´2, dpY q “ 0, dpY
Consequently, Y is not homology cobordant to any AR plumbed three-manifold.
Finally, we give a new proof of the following result:
Theorem 1.7 (cf. Fintushel-Stern [6], Furuta [7]). The homology cobordism group Θ3Z is
infinitely generated.
The original proofs of Theorem 1.7 used Yang-Mills theory. Recently, Stoffregen [24] gave
another proof, which is based on Pinp2q-equivariant Seiberg-Witten Floer homology. Our
proof is modelled on that of Stoffregen, but uses involutive Heegaard Floer homology—thus,
replacing gauge theory with symplectic geometry. Specifically, we show that the Brieskorn
spheres
Σpp, 2p ´ 1, 2p ` 1q, p ě 3, p odd
are linearly independent in Θ3Z , forming a Z8 subgroup. (The same manifolds were considered
by Stoffregen in [24].)
Organization of the paper. Section 2 reviews some background material on involutive Heegaard Floer homology, plumbings, graded roots, and lattice homology. In Section 3, we identify

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

5

the action of the conjugation involution on the Heegaard Floer homology of AR plumbed threemanifolds. In Section 4 we describe a free complex that computes the lattice homology H´ pRk q,
which we call the standard complex associated to the graded root; moreover, we prove that a
complex of this form (with its involution) is uniquely determined by pRk , J0 q up to equivalence.
This key fact is used in Section 5 to prove Theorems 1.1 and 1.2. In Section 6 we describe the
local equivalence class of a graded root, in terms of an associated monotone root. In Section 7
we study the tensor products of standard complexes associated to monotone graded roots.
These results are then put to use in Section 8, where we prove Theorems 1.3, 1.6 and 1.7, as
well as Corollaries 1.4 and 1.5.
Acknowledgements. We thank Tye Lidman, Matthew Stoffregen, Zoltán Szabó and Ian
Zemke for helpful conversations and suggestions.
2. Background
2.1. Involutive Heegaard Floer homology. We assume that the reader is familiar with
Heegaard Floer homology, as in [21, 20, 22, 18]. Throughout the paper we will work with
coefficients in F “ Z{2. Furthermore, we will only consider rational homology spheres Y ,
equipped with self-conjugate spinc structures s. In this situation, the Heegaard Floer groups
y pY, sq, HF ` pY, sq, HF ´ pY, sq, HF 8 pY, sq
HF
have absolute Q-gradings, and are modules over the ring FrU s. We focus on the minus version,
which is the homology of a complex CF ´ “ CF ´ pY, sq, consisting of free FrU s-modules. The
other three Floer complexes can be obtained from CF ´ :
(3)

y “ CF ´ {pU “ 0q, CF 8 “ U ´1 CF ´ , CF ` “ CF 8 {CF ´ .
CF

The construction of CF ˝ pY, sq relies on fixing a particular Heegaard pair H “ pH, Jq for Y ,
consisting of a pointed Heegaard diagram H “ pΣ, α, β, zq, with Σ embedded in Y , together
with a family of almost-complex structures J on Symg pΣq. We use the notation CF ˝ pH, sq
to emphasize the dependence of CF ˝ pY, sq on H. If H and H1 are two Heegaard pairs for Y
with the same basepoint z, then by work of Juhász and Thurston [10], we obtain a preferred
isomorphism
ΨpH, H1 q : HF ˝ pH, sq Ñ HF ˝ pH1 , sq.
More precisely, choosing any sequence of moves relating H and H1 yields a chain homotopy
equivalence
ΦpH, H1 q : CF ˝ pH, sq Ñ CF ˝ pH1 , sq
inducing the isomorphism Ψ above. The map Φ is itself unique up to chain homotopy in the
sense that choosing any other sequence of moves yields a map chain-homotopic to it; cf. [8,
Proposition 2.3]. This justifies the use of the notation CF ˝ pY, sq, rather than CF ˝ pH, sq.
We now define a grading-preserving homotopy involution on CF ˝ pY, sq. Given a Heegaard
pair H for Y , define the conjugate Heegaard pair H to be the conjugate Heegaard diagram
H “ p´Σ, β, α, zq,
together with the conjugate family of almost-complex structures J¯ on Symg p´Σq. Then intersection points in Tα X Tβ for H are in one-to-one correspondence with those for H, and
¯
J-holomorphic disks with boundary on pTα , Tβ q are in one-to-one correspondence with Jholomorphic disks with boundary on pTβ , Tα q. Thus, as observed in [20, Theorem 2.4], we
obtain a canonical isomorphism
η : CF ˝ pH, sq Ñ CF ˝ pH, sq,

6

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

where we have used the fact that in our case s “ s̄. Since H and H are Heegaard pairs for the
same three-manifold, we may further define the composition
ι “ ΦpH1 , Hq ˝ η : CF ˝ pH, sq Ñ CF ˝ pH, sq.
In [8, Section 2.2] it is shown that ι is a well-defined map on CF ˝ pY, sq (up to the notion of
equivalence considered below) and that ι2 is chain-homotopic to the identity.
The involutive Heegaard Floer complex CFI ´ pY, sq is then in [8] defined to be the mapping
cone of 1 ` ι on CF ´ , with a new variable Q that marks the target (as opposed to the domain)
of the cone; cf. the formula (1). By taking homology we obtain the invariant HFI ´ pY, sq. The
other three flavors of involutive Heegaard Floer homology are constructed similarly.
We can formalize the algebra underlying CFI ´ pY, sq as in [9, Section 8]. The following is
Definition 8.1 in [9], slightly modified to allow for Q-gradings:
Definition 2.1. An ι-complex is a pair pC, ιq, consisting of
‚ a Q-graded, finitely generated, free chain complex C over the ring FrU s, where degpU q “
´2. Moreover, we ask that there is some τ P Q such that the complex C is supported
in degrees differing from τ by integers. We also require that there is a relatively graded
isomorphism
(4)

U ´1 H˚ pCq – FrU, U ´1 s,
and that U ´1 H˚ pCq is supported in degrees differing from τ by even integers;
‚ a grading-preserving chain homomorphism ι : C Ñ C, such that ι2 is chain homotopic
to the identity.

An example of an ι-complex is CF ´ pY, sq, equipped with the conjugation involution. Further, when Y is an integral homology sphere, this is an ι-complex where we can take τ “ 0.
Let us also recall Definition 8.3 in [9]:
Definition 2.2. Two ι-complexes pC, ιq and pC 1 , ι1 q are called equivalent if there exist chain
homotopy equivalences
F : C Ñ C 1, G : C 1 Ñ C
that are homotopy inverses to each other, and such that
F ˝ ι » ι1 ˝ F,

G ˝ ι1 » ι ˝ G,

where » denotes FrU s-equivariant chain homotopy.
To each ι-complex pC, ιq, we can associate an involutive complex
`
˘
Qp1`ιq
(5)
I ´ pC, ιq :“ Cone C˚ ÝÝÝÝÝÝÑ Q¨C˚ r´1s ,
For example, I ´ pCF ´ , ιq “ CFI ´ . We refer to the homology of the mapping cone as the
involutive homology of pC, ιq and denote it by HI ´ pC, ιq.
The proof of the following lemma is based on a simple filtration argument; compare [8, proof
of Proposition 2.8].
Lemma 2.3. An equivalence of ι-complexes induces a quasi-isomorphism between the respective
involutive complexes (5).
In this paper, we will describe the equivalence class of the pair pCF ´ pY, sq, ιq for certain
three-manifolds. By the above lemma, the equivalence class determines the involutive Heegaard
Floer homology HFI ´ pY, sq, up to isomorphism. Furthermore, from CF ´ we can derive the
other Heegaard Floer complexes using (3), and the map ι descends to similar maps on those

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

7

complexes. From here, we can get the corresponding flavors of involutive Heegaard Floer
homology, again up to isomorphism.
The equivalence class of pCF ´ , ιq also appears in the following connected sum formula, which
follows from [9, Theorem 1.1].
Theorem 2.4 ([9]). Suppose Y1 and Y2 are rational homology spheres equipped with selfconjugate spinc structures s1 and s2 . Let ι1 , ι2 and ι denote the conjugation involutions on
the Floer complexes CF ´ pY1 , s1 q, CF ´ pY2 , s2 q and CF ´ pY1 #Y2 , s1 #s2 q. Then, the equivalence
class of the ι-complex pCF ´ pY1 #Y2 q, ιq is the same as that of
`
˘
CF ´ pY1 , s1 q bFrU s CF ´ pY2 , s2 qr´2s, ι1 b ι2 ,
where r´2s denotes a grading shift.
Remark 2.5. The grading shift is due to the fact that, with the usual conventions in Heegaard
Floer theory, HF ´ pS 3 q “ Z is supported in degree ´2.
We now review the definition of the correction terms. In [18], Ozsváth and Szabó defined
the d-invariant as the minimal degree of a nonzero element in the infinite tower of HF ` ; or,
equivalently, as the maximal degree of a nonzero element in the infinite tail of HF ´ , plus two:
n
dpY, sq “ maxtr | D x P HF ´
r pY, sq, @ n ě 0, U x ‰ 0u ` 2.

In involutive Heegaard Floer homology, there are two analogous invariants
n
n
dpY, sq “ maxtr | D x P HFI ´
r pY, sq, @ n ě 0, U x ‰ 0 and U x R ImpQqu ` 1

and
¯ sq “ maxtr | D x P HFI ´ pY, sq, @ n ě 0, U n x ‰ 0; D m ě 0 s. t. U m x P ImpQqu ` 2.
dpY,
r
See [8, Section 5.1] and [9, Lemma 2.9].
(The shifts by 1 and 2 in these definitions are chosen so that d “ d “ d¯ “ 0 for Y “ S 3 .)
The above invariants satisfy
¯ sq
dpY, sq ď dpY, sq ď dpY,
and
¯ sq ” dpY, sq ” dpY, sq
dpY,

pmod 2Zq.

Moreover, they descend to maps
d, d, d¯ : Θ3Z Ñ 2Z,
where Θ3Z denotes the homology cobordism group (consisting of integral homology 3-spheres,
up to the equivalence given by homology cobordisms). Of the three maps above, only d is a
homomorphism.
For the purpose of computing the involutive Floer correction terms, it will be useful for us
to consider a weaker notion of equivalence than discussed above. Recall Definition 8.5 of [9]:
Definition 2.6. Two ι-complexes pC, ιq and pC 1 , ι1 q are called locally equivalent if there exist
(grading-preserving) homomorphisms
F : C Ñ C 1, G : C 1 Ñ C
such that
F ˝ ι » ι1 ˝ F,

G ˝ ι1 » ι ˝ G,

and F and G induce isomorphisms on homology after inverting the action of U .

8

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

Definition 2.6 is modelled on the relation between Floer chain complexes induced by a
homology cobordism. As observed in [9, Lemma 8.7], the relation of local equivalence respects
taking tensor products, in the sense that if pC, ιq or pC, ι1 q is changed by a local equivalence,
then their tensor product also changes by a local equivalence. One can thus define a group
structure on the set of ι-complexes modulo local equivalence, with multiplication given by the
tensor product; cf. [9, Section 8.3]. In [9] only ι-complexes with τ “ 0 were considered, and
the resulting group was denoted I. One can also form such a group from all ι-complexes, which
we denote by IQ . Of course, IQ is just the direct sum of infinitely many copies of I, one for
each rτ s P Q{2Z.
Given an ι-complex pC, ιq, we define dI and d¯I analogously to the involutive Floer correction
terms d and d¯ above. The same argument that shows d and d¯ are homology cobordism invariants (cf. [8, Proposition 5.4]) proves that these depend only on the local equivalence class of
pC, ιq. Hence we have (non-homomorphisms)
dI , d¯I : IQ Ñ Q.
If we have an actual Heegaard Floer complex pCF ´ pY, sq, ιq, we can identify it with its equiv¯ Theorem 2.4 states that under this
alence class in IQ , in which case dI “ d and d¯I “ d.
identification, the Floer ι-complex corresponding to the connected sum of pY1 , s1 q and pY2 , s2 q
is mapped to the grading-shifted tensor product of their images in IQ .
2.2. Plumbing graphs. We review here some facts about plumbings, with an emphasis on
the almost-rational graphs introduced in [14]. We refer to [17], [19] and [14] for more details.
Let G be a weighted graph, i.e., a graph equipped with a function m : VertpGq Ñ Z, where
VertpGq denotes the set of vertices of G. Let W “ W pGq be the four-manifold with boundary
obtained by attaching two-handles to B 4 (or, equivalently, plumbing together disk bundles
over S 2 ) according to the graph G. We denote by Y “ Y pGq the boundary of W , with the
induced orientation.
Each vertex v P VertpGq gives rise to a generator of H2 pW ; Zq represented by the core of the
corresponding two-handle. The intersection form on the integer lattice L “ H2 pW ; Zq is given
by
$
’
&mpvq if v “ w,
xv, wy “ 1
if v and w are connected by an edge,
’
%
0
otherwise.
From now on we will assume that the graph G is a tree and the intersection form on L is
negative definite; this is equivalent to Y being a rational homology sphere that is realized as
the link of a normal surface singularity.
For x P L, we write x ě 0 if x is a linear combination of the generators v P VertpGq with
non-negative coefficients. Further, we write x ą 0 if x ě 0 and x ‰ 0.
The dual lattice L1 “ HompL, Zq may be identified with H2 pW, Y ; Zq, and the exact sequence
0 Ñ H2 pW ; Zq Ñ H2 pW, Y ; Zq Ñ H1 pY ; Zq Ñ 0
shows that we can view L as a sublattice of L1 . The intersection form on L extends to a
Q-valued intersection form of L1 .
Let CharpGq be the set of characteristic vectors for G, i.e., vectors k P L1 such that
kpxq ” xx, xy mod 2
for all x P L. There is a natural action of L on CharpGq given by x : k ÞÑ k ` 2x, and we
denote the orbit of any k P CharpGq under this action by rks. Characteristic vectors k may
be identified with spinc structures on W , and equivalence classes rks may be identified with

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

9

spinc structures on Y . Self-conjugate spinc structures on Y correspond to the orbits rks lying
entirely in the sublattice L, that is, those which satisfy rks “ r´ks.
Fix k P CharpGq, and define χk : L Ñ Z by
(6)

χk pxq “ ´pkpxq ` xx, xyq{2.

There is a canonical characteristic element K P CharpGq characterized by Kpvq “ ´mpvq´2
for all v P VertpGq. If we view Y as the link of a normal surface singularity X with resolution
X̃, then K is the first Chern class of the canonical bundle of the complex structure on X̃.
A normal surface singularity is called rational if its geometric genus is zero. By the work of
Artin [1, 2], the manifold Y “ Y pGq is the boundary of a rational normal surface singularity
if and only if
χK pxq ě 1 for any x ą 0, x P L.
If G satisfies this property, we will say that G is a rational plumbing graph.
Definition 2.7 (Némethi [14]). Let G be a weighted tree with a negative definite intersection
form on L, as above. We say that G is AR (almost-rational) if there exists a vertex v0 of G
such that by replacing the value m0 “ mpv0 q with some m10 ď m0 we obtain a rational plumbing
graph G1 .
In this situation, we refer to Y “ Y pGq as an AR plumbed three-manifold.
The class of AR graphs includes:
‚ rational graphs;
‚ elliptic graphs (corresponding to normal surface singularities of geometric genus equal
to one);
‚ negative-definite, star-shaped graphs;
‚ negative-definite plumbing trees with at most one bad vertex, that is, a vertex v such
that mpvq ą ´dpvq, where dpvq is the degree of v. This is the class of plumbings
considered by Ozsváth and Szabó in [19].
In particular, if Y is a rational homology sphere Y that is Seifert fibered over an orbifold
with underlying space S 2 , then Y is an AR plumbed three-manifold coming from a star-shaped
graph G. Indeed, suppose that Y is the Seifert bundle with negative orbifold Euler number e,
and Seifert invariants
pa1 , b1 q, . . . , pan , bn q,
with 0 ă bi ă ai , gcdpai , bi q “ 0. Write ai {bi as a continued fraction
1

ai {bi “ k1i ´
k2i ´

1
..

. ´

1
kri i

Then, G is the star-shaped graph with r arms, such that the decoration of the central vertex
is
n
ÿ
bi
e0 “ e ´
a
i“1 i
and along the ith arm we see the decorations ´k1i , ´k2i , . . . , ´kri i , in that order starting from
the central vertex.
When
(7)

a1 a2 . . . an e “ ´1,

10

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

then Y is an integral homology sphere, denoted Σpa1 , . . . , an q. The values of bi are uniquely
determined by the values of ai , the fact that e0 P Z, and the condition (7). Moreover, any
Seifert fibered integral homology sphere is of the form ˘Σpa1 , . . . , an q for some ai .
Remark 2.8. All Seifert fibered rational homology spheres have base orbifold with underlying
space S 2 or RP2 . (Further, if they are integer homology spheres, this has to be S 2 .) When
the underlying space is RP2 , then the Seifert fibered rational homology sphere is an L-space,
by [4, Proposition 18]. We do not study this case in our paper, since the involutive Heegaard
Floer homology of L-spaces is easily determined by the ordinary Heegaard Floer homology; cf.
[8, Corollary 4.8].
2.3. Graded roots and lattice homology. The Heegaard Floer homology of an AR plumbed
three-manifold Y pGq can be described in terms of a combinatorial object, called a graded root,
which is associated to the weighted graph G. Graded roots were introduced in [14], where the
focus was on describing the groups HF ` p´Y pGqq. In this paper we will concentrate on the
minus version, HF ´ pY pGqq. By the duality isomorphism from [22, Proposition 7.11], we have
(8)

´˚´2
HF ´
p´Y, sq.
˚ pY, sq – HF `

Thus, we can consider the same graded roots as in [14], except here we find it more convenient
to reverse the grading, i.e., reflect them vertically. While the graded roots in [14] have an
infinite upward stem and finite roots below, ours will have an infinite downward stem and a
finite tree opening upward.
Specifically, with our conventions, a graded root is an infinite tree R equipped with a grading
function χ : VertpRq Ñ Q such that
‚ χpuq ´ χpvq “ ˘1 for any edge pu, vq,
‚ χpuq ă maxtχpvq, χpwqu for any edges pu, vq and pu, wq with v ‰ w,
‚ χ is bounded above,
‚ χ´1 pkq is finite for any k P Q, and
‚ #χ´1 pkq “ 1 for k ! 0.
Note that, since R is connected, the difference in the values of χ at any two vertices is an
integer.
To every graded root R we can associate an FrU s-module H´ pRq, with one generator for
each v P VertpRq, and relations
U ¨ v “ w if pv, wq is an edge, and χpvq ´ χpwq “ 1.
We define the degree of v P VertpRq to be 2χpvq, so that U is a map of degree ´2. It will
usually be convenient for us to think of R in terms of H´ pRq and view the vertices of R being
graded by their degree, rather than the function χ. Thus (for example), when we speak of a
graded root shifted by σ, we mean that the grading χ is shifted by σ{2, and when we construct
graded roots, we will sometimes use the terms “degree” and “grading” interchangeably to mean
2χ. This unfortunate overlap of terminology is due to the fact that 2χ, rather than χ, is more
naturally related to the Maslov grading in Floer homology.
Let us also mention that by reflecting a graded root R across the horizontal line of grading
´1 yields a downwards opening graded root Rr , of the kind considered in [14]. There is also an
associated FrU s-module H` pRq. Concretely, H` pRq has one generator for each v P VertpRq, in
grading ´2 ´ 2χpvq, and has relations
U ¨ w “ v if pv, wq is an edge, and χpvq ´ χpwq “ 1.
Now let G be a plumbing graph as in Section 2.2, and pick k P CharpGq. Following Némethi
in [14, 16] (cf. also [5, Section 1.2]), we can associate to pG, kq a graded root Rk as follows.

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

11

We consider the lattice L “ H2 pW ; Zq, and the function χk : L Ñ Z from (6). Let us identify
L with Zs using the basis coming from the vertices of G. Let Qq be the set of q-dimensional
side-length-one lattice cubes in Zs . We define a weight function
wq : Qq Ñ Z
by letting wq plq q be the maximum of χk pxq over all vertices x of lq . Set
ď
Sn “ tlq P Qq | wq plq q ď nu.
q

Note that there is an inclusion Sn´1 ãÑ Sn .
We let the vertices v of Rk in grading ´n be the connected components of Sn . Further, for
v P Sn´1 and w P Sn , we let pv, wq be an edge of Rk if and only if v Ď w.
We define the lattice homology H´ pG, kq to be H´ pRk q.
Building on the work of Ozsváth and Szabó [19], Némethi proved:
Theorem 2.9 (Némethi [14]). Let G be an AR plumbing graph and Y pGq be the corresponding
three-manifold. For k P CharpGq, let
σ “ σpG, kq “ ´

|G| ` k 2
,
4

where |G| denotes the number of vertices of G.
Then, the Heegaard Floer homology of Y pGq is given by
(9)

HF ´ pY pGq, rksq – H´ pRk qrσ ` 2s.

In particular, the d-invariants of Y pGq are given by
dpY pGq, rksq “

|G| ` k 2
|G| ` pk 1 q2
´ 2 min χk “ max
.
4
4
k1 Prks

Note that HF ´ of an AR plumbed three-manifold is always supported in degrees congruent
to σ modulo 2Z.
We will sometimes abuse notation slightly and denote the shifted root Rk rσ ` 2s simply by
R when no confusion is possible. We refer to R “ Rk rσ ` 2s as the graded root associated to
HF ´ pY pGq, sq. Note that this depends only on rks P Spinc pY pGqq, not on k itself, as indeed
we have
HF ´ pY pGq, sq – H´ pRq.
Since the highest degree of a nonzero element in HF ´ is dpY pGq, rksq ´ 2, the d-invariant is
the maximum degree of a vertex in R, plus two.
With regard to the plus versions, in view of (8), we have isomorphisms
(10)

HF ` p´Y pGq, rksq – H` pRq – H` pRk qr´σ ´ 2s.

Example 2.10. Consider the Brieskorn sphere Y “ Σp2, 7, 15q, which is ´1 surgery on the torus
knot T2,7 . The manifold Y can be represented as the boundary of a plumbing on the AR graph
−2

−1

−3

−2

−2

−15
´

The graded root associated to HF pΣp2, 7, 15qq was computed in [15, 26], and is shown in
Figure 1. The d-invariant is zero.

12

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

We now introduce the following concept.
Definition 2.11. A symmetric graded root is a graded root R together with an involution
J : VertpRq Ñ VertpRq such that
‚ χpvq “ χpJvq for any vertex v,
‚ pv, wq is an edge in R if and only if pJv, Jwq is an edge on R,
‚ for every k P Q, there is at most one J-invariant vertex v with χpvq “ k.
We can represent every symmetric graded root by a planar tree that is symmetric about the
vertical axis (the infinite downwards stem). The involution J is the reflection about this axis.
Note that, for a symmetric graded root, the involution J induces an involution (still denoted
J) on the corresponding lattice homologies H´ pRk q, H` pRk q. The action of J there commutes
with that of the variable U .
Symmetric graded roots appear naturally when we consider self-conjugate spinc structures
on an AR plumbed three-manifold Y pGq. Let s “ rks be such a spinc structure. As before, let
L be the integer lattice spanned by the vertices of G. There is an obvious involution J0 on L
given by
J0 x “ ´x ´ k,
where k is viewed as lying in the lattice L1 . Since s is self-conjugate, J0 maps L into itself,
and it is easily checked that the weight function wq is invariant under J0 . Thus, J0 induces
an involution on the set of connected components of each set Sn , and hence an involution on
the graded root Rk . This makes pRk , J0 q into a symmetric graded root. See [5, Section 2.1]
for further discussion.
3. The involution on Heegaard Floer homology
In Section 2.1 we introduced the homotopy involution ι on the Heegaard Floer complexes of
three-manifolds equipped with self-conjugate spinc structures. The goal of this section will be
to identify the action induced by ι at the level of Heegaard Floer homology, for AR plumbed
three-manifolds.
Theorem 3.1. Let Y “ Y pGq be an AR plumbed three-manifold and let s “ rks be a selfconjugate spinc structure on Y . Then, under the isomorphism (9) from Theorem 2.9, the
induced action ι˚ of ι on HF ´ pY, sq coincides with the reflection involution J0 on H´ pRk qrσ`2s.
Proof. We begin by reviewing the construction of the isomorphism between Heegaard Floer
homology and lattice homology. For convenience, we work with the plus versions, as in the
original picture of [19, 14]; that is, we will focus on the isomorphisms (10).
The plumbing graph G gives an oriented cobordism W between ´Y and S 3 . Let Chars pGq Ă
CharpGq denote the set of characteristic vectors on W limiting to s on ´Y . We denote a typical
element of Chars pGq by k, with rks “ s being fixed.
Let T0` be the graded FrU s-module HF ` pS 3 q “ FrU, U ´1 s{U FrU s. For any element x P
HF ` p´Y, sq, define a map φx : Chars pGq Ñ T0` by
`
φx pkq “ FW,k
pxq,
`
where FW,k
is the Heegaard Floer cobordism map associated to the spinc structure on W with
c1 “ k. In [19], it is shown that for any x, the map φx satisfies a set of “adjunction relations”
relating the values of φx on different characteristic vectors in Chars pGq. Specifically, for every
v P VertpGq Ă H2 pW ; Zq, if we set n “ pkpvq ` xv, vyq{2, we have

U n ¨ φx pk ` 2P Drvsq “ φx pkq, for n ě 0

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

13

and
φx pk ` 2P Drvsq “ U ´n ¨ φx pkq, for n ă 0.
The set of all maps from Chars pGq to T0` satisfying these relations forms a graded FrU smodule, which can be identified with the lattice homology H` pRk qr´σ ´ 2s; cf. Proposition
4.7 in [14]. Under this identification, the reflection involution J0 on Rk corresponds to precomposing a map φx P H` pG, sq with the reflection k ÞÑ ´k on Chars pGq.
Theorem 8.3 in [14] says that the correspondence x ÞÑ φx effects a graded FrU s-module
isomorphism between HF ` p´Y, sq and the lattice homology H` pRk qr´σ ´ 2s, as in (10).
Unwinding the definitions, to check that ι˚ on HF ` p´Y, sq corresponds to J0 under these
isomorphisms is equivalent to proving that
φx pkq “ φι˚ pxq p´kq
for all x P HF ` p´Y, sq and k P Chars pGq. In other words, we must establish the equality
`
`
FW,k
“ FW,´k
˝ ι˚ .

This follows from [22, Theorem 3.6], which says that the cobordism maps commute with the
conjugation involutions. We are also using here the fact that the involution on HF ` pS 3 q is the
3
identity, which is clear because HF `
d pS q has dimension at most one in every degree d.
We have thus identified the involution ι˚ on HF ` p´Y, sq with the reflection symmetry on
the graded root. Recall that the plus version of Heegaard Floer homology for ´Y is related
to the minus version of Heegaard Floer cohomology for Y , via the duality isomorphism (8).
Furthermore, it is proved in [8, Section 4.2] that the involutions ι˚ are taken to each other
under this duality isomorphism. The desired characterization of the involution for the minus
version follows from here.

Remark 3.2. Theorem 3.1 is the analogue in the Heegaard Floer setting of the equivariance
established by the first author in [5] for the j-involution on monopole Floer homology.
Remark 3.3. In the proof of Theorem 3.1 we made use of Theorem 3.6 from [22], the commutation of cobordism maps with the conjugation involutions. The proof of that theorem
relies, in particular, on [22, Lemma 5.2], which identifies the cobordism maps induced by leftsubordinate and right-subordinate triple Heegaard diagrams. In turn, the proof of [22, Lemma
5.2] uses the cancellation of two-handle maps with three-handle maps, which is an instance
of the invariance statement for cobordism maps (that they depend only on the cobordism,
not on the handle decompositions and Heegaard diagrams being used). A complete proof of
this invariance statement, based on the arguments of Ozsváth and Szabó from [22] and the
naturality results of Juhász-Thurston [10], was given by Zemke in [27]. Note that, for the plus
and minus versions, the cobordism maps do not depend on the choice of a path between the
basepoints (whereas for the hat version they do); see [27, Theorem G].
4. Standard complexes associated to graded roots
In this section, we construct a model chain complex for the involutive Floer homology of
an AR plumbed three-manifold. We begin by defining a particularly simple model for H´ pRq,
where R is an arbitrary graded root as defined in Section 2.3. Let v1 , v2 , . . . , vn be the leaves
of R, enumerated in left-to-right lexicographic order. We also enumerate by α1 , α2 , . . . , αn´1
the n ´ 1 upward-opening angles in left-to-right lexicographic order. More precisely, let vi
and vi`1 be any two consecutive leaves in our enumeration, so that there are unique paths γi
and γi`1 in R that start at vi and vi`1 , respectively, and run down the entire length of the
infinite stem. These two paths merge at a unique vertex of highest grading, and this vertex

14

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

supports a unique angle whose sides lie on γi and γi`1 , which we denote by αi . The case of
HF ´ pΣp2, 7, 15qq is shown below in Figure 1.
v3

v4

v2

v5
α2 α3 α4

v1

v6
α1 α5

..
.
Figure 1. Graded root (with leaf and angle labels) for HF ´ pΣp2, 7, 15qq.
Uppermost vertices have Maslov grading ´2; successive rows have grading difference two.
We construct a free and finitely-generated model chain complex with the same homology
and FrU s-structure as H´ pRq. Let grpvi q “ 2χpvi q denote the degree of vertex vi , and let
grpαi q denote the degree of the vertex supporting angle αi . The generators (over FrU s) of our
complex are given as follows. For each vertex vi , we place a single generator in grading grpvi q,
which by abuse of notation we also denote by vi . Note that vi is a generator of our complex
over FrU s, so that as an abelian group we are introducing an entire tower of generators FrU svi .
For each angle αi , we similarly place a single generator in grading grpαi q ` 1, denoting this by
αi . This gives a splitting of our complex into chains spanned by U -powers of the vi , which we
refer to as even chains, and chains spanned by U -powers of the αi , which we refer to as odd
chains.
We now define our differential to be identically zero on the even chains, and set
Bαi “ U pgrpvi q´grpαi qq{2 vi ` U pgrpvi`1 q´grpαi qq{2 vi`1
on the αi , extending to the entire complex linearly and U -equivariantly. Note that since B
takes each αi to the sum of (U -powers of) vi and vi`1 , it follows from the fact that the αi
are ordered from α1 to αn´1 that B is injective on the odd chains in C˚ pRq. We call this
complex the standard complex associated to R and denote it by C˚ pRq. The standard complex
associated to the graded root given in Figure 1 is shown in Figure 2.
It is easily verified that C˚ pRq replicates the homology and FrU s-structure given by H´ pRq.
Roughly speaking, the idea is that R may be formed by taking n infinite disjoint strands
corresponding to the paths γ1 , γ2 , . . . , γn and gluing together each pair γi and γi`1 below some
grading determined by the branch points of R. On the side of C˚ pRq, this corresponds to the
fact that generators in the tower FrU svi are in bijection with the vertices of γi ; the αi serve
to “glue together” (on the level of homology) generators in different towers. The reader may
find it useful to compare Figures 1 and 2. A precise version of this argument is given below.
Lemma 4.1. Let R be a graded root. Then the homology H˚ pRq of the chain complex C˚ pRq
is isomorphic to H´ pRq as a FrU s-module.

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

v3

v4

v2

v5
α2

α4

α3

v1

v6
α1

..
.

15

..
.

α5
..
.

..
.

..
.

..
.

..
.

..
.

..
.

..
.

..
.

Figure 2. Standard complex associated to the FrU s-module HF ´ pΣp2, 7, 15qq.
Solid lines represent the action of U ; dashed lines represent the action of B.
Proof. First observe that since B is injective on the odd part of C˚ pRq, the homology H˚ pRq
is supported only in even degrees. Thus, consider an even chain of the form U n vi . This is in
fact a cycle, since B is zero on even chains. Let γi be the unique path in R that starts at vi
and runs down the infinite stem of R. Our proposed isomorphism takes the homology class of
U n vi in C˚ pRq to the generator of H´ pRq corresponding to the unique vertex in R that lies
on γi and is distance n from vi . (That is, there is a sub-path of γi consisting of n edges which
joins vi and the desired vertex.) Said differently, we map the homology class of vi in C˚ pRq
to the element of H´ pRq corresponding to the vertex vi in R, and extend U -equivariantly to
generators in the tower FrU svi .
In order to check that this is well-defined, we must check that if U a vi and U b vj are homologous in C˚ pRq, then the above procedure yields the same vertex in R for both. It suffices
to establish the case when j “ i ` 1 and the two cycles U a vi and U b vi`1 are homologous via
a single boundary element BU c αi , since in general we simply sum together such cases. By
definition, the existence of αi means that the paths γi and γi`1 coincide in all gradings less
than or equal to grpαi q. Since the gradings of the two cycles in question are given by grpαi q´2c
with c ě 0, this proves the claim.
Our correspondence is clearly equivariant with respect to the action of U , and we may extend
it linearly to all of C˚ pRq to obtain a FrU s-module map from H˚ pRq to H´ pRq. It is obviously
surjective, since any vertex in R lies on a path from some leaf to the infinite stem. Moreover,
as a map defined on the cycles of C˚ pRq, our correspondence has kernel spanned precisely by
sums of the form BU c αi “ U a vi ` U b vi`1 , as above. This completes the proof.

Now suppose that R is a symmetric graded root. There is an obvious involution on C˚ pRq
given by sending vi to vn´i`1 , αi to αn´i , and extending linearly and U -equivariantly. Since
this evidently induces the reflection map on H˚ pRq – H´ pRq described in Section 2.3, by a
slight abuse of notation we similarly denote this involution and its induced action on homology
by J0 . We claim that J0 is standard in the sense that any other chain map on C˚ pRq which
induces the reflection involution on H˚ pRq must be chain homotopic to it. In general, of course,
two maps that induce the same map on homology need not be chain homotopic, but in our
case the extreme simplicity of C˚ pRq allows us to tautologically construct the chain homotopy:
Lemma 4.2. Let J0 be the involution on C˚ pRq given by sending vi to vn´i`1 , αi to αn´i ,
and extending linearly and U -equivariantly. Any other chain map J on C˚ pRq which induces
the reflection involution on H˚ pRq – H´ pRq is chain homotopic to J0 .

16

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

Proof. We construct a chain homotopy H between J and J0 as follows. Let v be an even chain
in C˚ pRq. Since v is automatically a cycle and J and J0 induce the same map on homology,
we know that Jv and J0 v differ by a boundary. Because B has zero kernel on the odd part of
C˚ pRq, this boundary has a unique preimage under B, which we denote by Hv. Thus we have
Jv ` J0 v “ BHv. Note that since J and J0 are linear and U -equivariant, the uniqueness of
Hv shows that H is a linear and U -equivariant map from the even chains to the odd chains
of C˚ pRq. We define our chain homotopy to be equal to H on the even part of C˚ pRq and
identically zero on the odd part of C˚ pRq.
Because B is identically zero on the even part of C˚ pRq, the above equality establishes the
desired chain homotopy identity on even chains. Thus, let α be an odd chain. Putting v “ Bα
yields the equality JBα ` J0 Bα “ BHBα. Since J and J0 are chain maps, the left-hand side
is equal to BpJα ` J0 αq, and since B has zero kernel on the odd part of C˚ pRq, this shows
that Jα ` J0 α “ HBα. Having defined H to be zero on odd chains, this establishes the chain
homotopy identity for odd chains, completing the proof.

Remark 4.3. In the above proof, we did not actually use the fact that J or J0 induced the reflection involution. More generally, let f and g be two chain maps between standard complexes
of graded roots. Then if f and g coincide on the level of homology, the above construction
shows that f and g are chain homotopic.
Now let Y be an AR plumbed three-manifold and s “ rks be a self-conjugate spinc structure
on Y . For convenience, denote by R the (shifted) graded root Rk rσ ` 2s, so that HF ´ pY, sq –
H´ pRq. We claim that the pairs pCF ´ pY, sq, ιq and pC˚ pRq, J0 q are equivalent ι-complexes.
We begin by first showing that the complexes CF ´ pY, sq and C˚ pRq are homotopy equivalent
over FrU s. This is a consequence of the following standard algebraic lemma, whose proof is
just a re-phrasing of the fact that any two free resolutions of the same module are homotopy
equivalent.
Lemma 4.4. Let C1 and C2 be two chain complexes which are free over a principal ideal
domain. If C1 and C2 have the same homology, then they are (non-canonically) homotopy
equivalent.
Proof. Let H1 and H2 be the homologies of pC1 , B1 q and pC2 , B2 q, respectively. Because submodules of free modules over a principal ideal domain are free, we may choosing splittings
C1 “ Z1 ‘ B1 and C2 “ Z2 ‘ B2 , where Zi “ kerBi Ď Ci and the Bi map isomorphically onto
im Bi Ď Ci via Bi . These fit into free resolutions
B

i
0 Ñ Bi Ý
Ñ
Zi Ñ Hi Ñ 0

for i “ 1, 2. If we fix an isomorphism φ between H0 and H1 , then a standard diagram chase
allows us to extend φ to a commutative diagram
0

B1

B1

g

0

B2

Z1
f

B2

Z2

H1

0

φ

H2

0

This defines a map f ‘ g : C1 Ñ C2 . After constructing a similar diagram for φ´1 , the usual
proof that any two free resolutions of the same module are homotopy equivalent shows that
f ‘ g is a homotopy equivalence. Moreover, an examination of the maps constructed shows
that if H1 and H2 are graded and φ preserves the grading, then the maps f and g can also

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

17

be chosen to preserve grading, and all chain homotopy maps increase grading by one. This
completes the proof.

Since CF ´ pY, sq and C˚ pRq are free over FrU s, Lemmas 4.1 and 4.4 imply that they are
homotopy equivalent. Moreover, we may choose this homotopy equivalence so that the induced
isomorphism on homology coincides with the lattice homology isomorphism between H˚ pRq –
H´ pRq and HF ´ pY, sq. However, if we want to take into account the structure of CF ´ pY, sq
and C˚ pRq as ι-complexes, we should view them as complexes over the free polynomial ring in
two variables FrU, ιs. Because our complexes are not free over FrU, ιs (nor indeed is FrU, ιs a
principal ideal domain), we cannot apply Lemma 4.4 to identify J0 with ι on the chain level.
Instead, let the homotopy equivalence between C˚ pRq and CF ´ pY, sq be given by the pair of
maps F : C˚ pRq Ñ CF ´ pY, sq and G : CF ´ pY, sq Ñ C˚ pRq. Then we can pull back ι to a map
J “ G ˝ ι ˝ F : C˚ pRq Ñ C˚ pRq.
By construction, the pairs pC˚ pRq, Jq and pCF ´ pY, sq, ιq are equivalent in the sense of Definition 2.2. Moreover, according to Theorem 3.1 the homological action of J on H˚ pRq is given
by the reflection involution, since F and G on the homological level coincide with the lattice
homology isomorphism H´ pRq – HF ´ pY, sq. Since this is also the action of J0 , Lemma 4.2
implies that J and J0 are chain homotopic. Hence we have:
Theorem 4.5. Let Y “ Y pGq be the plumbed three-manifold associated to an AR graph G,
oriented as the boundary of the plumbing. Let s “ rks be a self-conjugate spinc structure on
Y . Let also Rk be the graded root associated to pG, kq, and let J0 be the reflection involution
on C˚ pRk qrσ ` 2s. Then, the pairs pCF ´ pY, sq, ιq and pC˚ pRk qrσ ` 2s, J0 q are equivalent ιcomplexes.
Proof. As observed above, the pairs pC˚ pRq, Jq and pCF ´ pY, sq, ιq are equivalent ι-complexes
by Lemmas 4.1 and 4.4, together with the construction of J. The maps J and J0 are moreover
chain homotopic as maps from C˚ pRq to itself by Theorem 3.1 and Lemma 4.2. This shows
that the pairs pC˚ pRq, Jq and pC˚ pRq, J0 q are equivalent ι-complexes (taking the maps F and
G in Definition 2.2 to be the identity).

We finally obtain the desired result:
Corollary 4.6. The involutive complexes associated to the pairs pCF ´ pY, sq, ιq and pC˚ pRk qrσ`
2s, J0 q are quasi-isomorphic.
Proof. This follows immediately from Lemma 2.3 and Theorem 4.5.



5. The involutive Heegaard Floer homology of AR plumbed three-manifolds
We now prove Theorem 1.1. Note that since J0 is equivariant with respect to the action of
U , the expressions2 kerp1 ` J0 q and cokerp1 ` J0 q inherit graded FrU s-module structures from
H´ pRk qrσ ` 2s.
Proof of Theorem 1.1. Denote by R the (shifted) graded root Rk rσ ` 2s. By Corollary 4.6,
the involutive homology of pC˚ pRq, J0 q is isomorphic to HFI ´ pY, sq. Write the mapping cone
complex of C˚ pRq as the complex C˚ pRqr´1s b FrQs{Q2 , together with the differential B 1 “
B ` Qp1 ` J0 q. Recall that C˚ pRq splits into even and odd chains, which we denote by Ceven
2Recall that we use the same notation J to denote the involution on the complex C pRq and on its homology.
0
˚

Whenever we write kerp1 ` J0 q, imp1 ` J0 q or cokerp1 ` J0 q, we refer to the action on homology.

18

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

and Codd , respectively. Expanding the mapping cone complex with respect to this splitting,
we obtain the complex
Qp1 ` J0 q

Codd r´1s

QCodd r´1s

B

B
Qp1 ` J0 q

Ceven r´1s

QCeven r´1s

with the action of B 1 on each term given by the sum of all outgoing arrows. Since B is injective
on Codd , we see from this that ker B 1 is the direct sum of QCeven r´1s and the submodule K of
Ceven r´1s ‘ QCodd r´1s defined by
K “ tv ` Qα : v P Ceven and α P Codd and p1 ` J0 qv “ Bαu.
After quotienting out by im B 1 , the term QCeven r´1s gives us a summand isomorphic to
cokerp1 ` J0 q. To understand what happens to K, observe that for a fixed even chain v,
there exists an odd chain α such that v ` Qα P K if and only if p1 ` J0 qv is nullhomologous in
C˚ pRq. If such an α exists, it is moreover unique since B is injective on odd chains. Identifying
elements v ` Qα P K with their even parts v, it follows that after quotienting out by im B 1 , the
term K gives rise to a summand isomorphic to kerp1 ` J0 q. Moreover, it is clear that under this
identification, the action of Q takes kerp1 ` J0 q to kerp1 ` J0 q{ imp1 ` J0 q Ď cokerp1 ` J0 q, since
a representative of the form v ` Qα is mapped simply to Qv. This completes the proof.

Theorem 1.1 should be compared with Theorem 2.3 of [5], in which a similar expression is
derived for the Pin(2)-equivariant monopole Floer homology. Indeed, in the spirit of the proof
given there, a simpler proof of Theorem 1.1 can be given using the standard mapping cone
sequence relating HFI ´ pY, sq and HF ´ pY, sq established in [8, Proposition 4.6]. As we shall
see in a moment, however, the advantage of constructing an actual model chain complex is
that we may invoke the connected sum formula to compute the involutive Floer homology of
connected sums of AR manifolds.
Remark 5.1. It is conjectured in [8, Conjecture 3.2] that, for rational homology spheres Y , the
involutive Heegaard Floer homology HFI `
˚ pY, sq is isomorphic to the Z{4-equivariant Borel
homology of the Seiberg-Witten Floer spectrum SWF pY, sq. Theorem 1.1, combined with the
calculations of Stoffregen from [25], confirms the conjecture in the case of rational homology
spheres that are Seifert fibered over an orbifold with underlying space S 2 . Indeed, for such
spaces, Stoffregen gives a model for the cellular chain complex of the Seiberg-Floer spectrum,
with F coefficients, as a module over the cellular complex of the symmetry group Pinp2q. From
this information, using [25, Equation (8)] for the subgroup Z{4 Ă Pinp2q, one can compute the
Z{4-equivariant homology of SWF pY, sq, and check that it agrees with our calculations.
Alternatively, one can use [8, Proposition 3.1], which says that for a space X with a Pinp2q
action, we have an isomorphism
1

Qp1`ιq

1

H˚ pX; Fq – H˚ pConepC˚S pX; Fq ÝÝÝÝÑ Q¨C˚S pX; Fqr´1sqq.
Z{4

1

1

This leads to an exact triangle relating H˚S pX; Fq to H˚ pX; Fq. We have H˚S pSWF pY, sq; Fq –
HF ` pY, sq by [11]. By passing to the coBorel and minus versions, and using the fact that
˚ pSWF pY, sq; Fq is isomorphic to the
HF ´ pY, sq is supported in even degrees, we find that HZ{4
cone of 1 ` J0 on homology, in agreement with the calculation in involutive Heegaard Floer
homology.
Z{4

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

19

We now make a brief digression to present an attractive graphical representation of the
involutive homology associated to a symmetric graded root R. We begin by drawing a graded
root for the FrU s-module cokerp1 ` J0 q. Passing from H´ pRq to cokerp1 ` J0 q identifies pairs of
vertices that are symmetric across the infinite stem, with the caveat that vertices lying on the
stem itself remain in singleton equivalence classes. Since this identification is U -equivariant,
we obtain a graded root whose lattice homology is cokerp1 ` J0 q by simply “folding R in half”
across this stem. See Figure 3 for an example.
Now consider kerp1 ` J0 q. As a vector space, this is isomorphic to cokerp1 ` J0 q, as indeed
it has the same rank in each grading. We thus begin by again folding R in half. However,
in this case the interpretation of the vertices in the half-root are slightly different. As before,
vertices lying on the infinite stem in the half-root are identified with their counterparts in R,
but vertices not on the infinite stem correspond to sums of symmetric pairs of vertices in R.
To see the effect that this has on the U -structure, suppose that v is a vertex of the latter kind
such that in our original graded root, the product w “ U v lies on the infinite stem. Then
J0 w “ w, so U pv ` J0 vq “ 2w “ 0. Hence in our half-root representation of kerp1 ` J0 q, the
vertices v and w are not connected by an edge. A graphical representation of kerp1`J0 q is thus
obtained by folding R in half and deleting each edge coming off of the infinite stem. Again,
see Figure 3 for an example.
Finally, to compute the action of Q from kerp1`J0 q to cokerp1`J0 q, observe that an element
of kerp1 ` J0 q consisting of the sum of two symmetric vertices maps to zero in cokerp1 ` J0 q,
while a vertex lying on the infinite stem has nonzero image. Thus the action of Q is an
isomorphism from the infinite stem of kerp1 ` J0 q onto the infinite stem of cokerp1 ` J0 q, and
is zero everywhere else. The complete construction for HFI ´ pΣp2, 7, 15qq is given below in
Figure 3. We refer to such a diagram as a graded root for the involutive homology, even
though it is not quite a graded root in the sense defined previously.
H´ pRq – HF ´ pΣp2, 7, 15qq

..
.

cokerp1 ` J0 q

..
.

kerp1 ` J0 q

..
.

Figure 3. Graded root for HFI ´ pΣp2, 7, 15qq. Dashed lines represent the action of Q; dotted lines are deleted edges in kerp1 ` J0 q. The half-root for
kerp1 ` J0 q has a grading shift of one relative to that for cokerp1 ` J0 q.
We now give an explicit description of the involutive Heegaard Floer correction terms for an
AR plumbed three-manifold. First, recall the definition of the Neumann-Siebenmann invariant
[17], [23]. Let Y be a three-manifold with spin structure s and plumbing graph G, and let

20

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

L be the integer lattice spanned by the vertices of G. Amongst the characteristic vectors on
L corresponding to spinc structures limiting to s on Y , there is a unique vector w (called
the Wu vector ) whose coordinates in the natural basis of G are all zero or one. Define the
Neumann-Siebenmann invariant of pY, sq by
˘
1`
µ̄pY, sq “
signpGq ´ w2 ,
8
where signpGq is the signature of G and w2 is the self-pairing of w. In [17] it is shown that
µ̄pY, sq is an integer lift of the Rokhlin invariant (defined for plumbed three-manifolds) and is
independent of the choice of plumbing diagram. It was conjectured in [13] that this invariant
was equal to βp´Y, sq for all Seifert fibered rational homology spheres; this was proven in [5]
for the larger class of all AR plumbed three-manifolds. We obtain here the analogous result
for the involutive Floer correction terms.
¯ sq, we search for elements x P HFI ´ pY, sq
Proof of Theorem 1.2. In order to compute dpY,
n
that have nonzero U -powers U x for every n, and which eventually lie in the image of Q.
Examining the description of HFI ´ pY, sq above, we see that any such x must lie in the summand
isomorphic to cokerp1 ` J0 q. Moreover, it is clear that an x with maximal grading satisfying
these conditions is given by the element corresponding to the uppermost vertex in the graded
root for cokerp1 ` J0 q. The degree of this vertex is the same as the degree of the uppermost
¯ sq “ dpY, sq.
vertex in R, which implies that dpY,
We now turn to dpY, sq. In this case we search for x whose U -powers do not lie in the image
of Q; an examination of Figure 3 shows that such x must lie in the copy of kerp1 ` J0 q. Since
the graded root representing kerp1 ` J0 q is not in general connected, the x of maximal grading
with the desired property is now represented by the uppermost vertex on the infinite stem of
kerp1 ` J0 q. More precisely, we have that
dpY, sq “ g ` 2,
where g is the degree in Rk rσ ` 2s of the uppermost J0 -invariant vertex. In Theorem 3.2 of
[5], the quantity g ` 2 was computed explicitly and shown to be equal to ´2µ̄pY, sq. 3

6. Monotone graded roots
In this section, we construct a special class of graded roots that will be used in the sequel
to carry out computations using the connected sum formula. The key result we prove here is
that the involutive complex of any symmetric graded root is locally equivalent, in the sense of
Definition 2.6, to the involutive complex of some root in this preferred class. For the purposes
of computing d¯I and dI , it will thus suffice to work with these simpler roots, rather than the
set of symmetric graded roots in general. Our result may also be thought of as providing a
convenient set of representatives for AR manifolds in the group IQ (as defined in Section 2.1).
Fix a positive integer n and let h1 , . . . , hn and r1 , . . . , rn be sequences of rational numbers,
all differing from one another by even integers, such that
(1) h1 ą h2 ą ¨ ¨ ¨ ą hn ,
(2) r1 ă r2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă rn , and
(3) hn ě rn .
3Recall from Section 2.3 that reflecting the graded root R rσ ` 2s across the horizontal line of grading
k
´1 yields a downwards opening graded root whose lattice homology computes the Heegaard Floer homology
HF ` p´Y, sq. Theorem 3.2 of [5] states that the degree of the lowermost J0 -invariant vertex in this reflected
root is 2µ̄pY, sq.

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

21

We construct a graded root M “ M ph1 , r1 ; . . . ; hn , rn q associated to this data as follows. First,
we form the stem of our graded root by drawing a single infinite U -tower with uppermost
vertex in degree rn . For each 1 ď i ă n, we then introduce a symmetric pair of leaves vi and
J0 vi in degree hi and connect these to the stem by using a pair of paths meeting the stem in
degree ri . (See Figure 4.) If hn ą rn , we similarly introduce a pair of vertices vn and J0 vn
in degree hn and connect these to the stem at rn ; in the “degenerate” case that hn “ rn , we
declare vn to be the J0 -invariant vertex of degree rn lying on the stem and take no further
action. Examples are given in Figure 4.
Degree
4
2
0

v1

J0 v1
v2

v1

J0 v1

J0 v2
v3 J0 v3

v2

..
.

..
.

-2
-4
-6
-8

Figure 4. M p4, ´8; 2, ´4; 0, ´2q (left) and M p4, ´4; 0, 0q (right).
We call a symmetric graded root constructed in this way a monotone graded root. Note
that if M is a monotone root, then the only vertices of M which have valency greater than two
lie on the stem and have degree equal to one of the ri . Note also that due to the ordering of
the ri , our indexing of the leaves vi is consistent with the lexicographic left-to-right ordering
described in Section 4. Geometrically, the “monotonicity” condition says that the gradings of
the leaves of M form a strictly decreasing sequence as we move inwards towards the stem.
We now investigate the standard complex of a monotone graded root parameterized by M “
M ph1 , r1 ; ¨ ¨ ¨ ; hn , rn q. For simplicity, assume for the moment that hn is strictly greater than rn .
Following the prescription of Section 4, the standard complex C˚ pM q has 2n even generators
corresponding to the leaves of M . Enumerating these by v1 , . . . , vn and their reflections by
vn`1 “ J0 vn , . . . , v2n “ J0 v1 , we see that vi has grading hi for 1 ď i ď n and h2n`1´i otherwise.
Furthermore, C˚ pM q has 2n ´ 1 odd generators αi , which have gradings ri ` 1 for 1 ď i ď n
and r2n´i ` 1 otherwise. The gradings of the vi are strictly decreasing as we move towards the
stem, while the gradings of the αi are strictly increasing.
If hn “ rn , then the prescription of Section 4 gives us a complex with 2n ´ 1 even generators.
However, we can easily make a slight modification to C˚ pM q in this case by introducing a
duplicate generator for vn in grading rn (in addition to the one which already exists) and
adding an extra odd generator in grading rn ` 1 whose boundary is the sum of the two
generators corresponding to vn . This gives a complex with the same properties as those
described in Section 4, but which is consistent with the notation of the previous paragraph.
For convenience, we will thus use “standard complex” to mean this slightly modified complex
in the case that our graded root has an odd number of leaves.
We now show that every symmetric graded root R has a monotone subroot. This will be
obtained as the smallest graded subroot of R containing a certain subset of leaves. In general

22

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

there may be multiple such subroots, but here we construct one which in some sense captures
as much of R as possible.
We begin with some terminology. Let v be any vertex in R. Denote by γv the half-infinite
path in R starting at v and running down the length of the stem. We define the base bpvq of v
to be the degree at which γv first meets the stem; i.e., the maximal degree of any vertex in the
intersection of the stem and γv . We denote the collection of all vertices in R with a specified
base b by Cb , and call this set the cluster of R based at b. Geometrically, Cb consists of all the
branches of R meeting the stem at degree b.
In general, we will use the term “cluster” to refer to a nontrivial cluster (i.e., one with more
than one vertex). If Cb is a nontrivial cluster, then it contains a pair of distinct leaves v and
J0 v whose gradings are maximal amongst the vertices of Cb . We call these leaves the tip(s) of
Cb . If Cb has more than one such pair, we arbitrarily select one to be the tip(s). Which one
we select is not important, but we will use the fact that we have a specially marked pair of
such vertices in each cluster.
We now construct a subset S of the leaves of R using the following “greedy” algorithm. Let
r be the degree of the uppermost J0 -invariant vertex v in R. If the cluster Cr is trivial, then we
add v to S; otherwise, we add the two tips of Cr to S. Next, let b be the greatest even integer
strictly less than r for which Cb is nontrivial. If the tips of Cb have degree strictly greater than
all of the vertices currently in S, then we add them to S; otherwise, we do not. We continue on
down the stem in this manner, adding tips of clusters precisely when they have height strictly
greater than any of the vertices currently in S. We define M to be the smallest graded subroot
of R that contains the leaves in S after this process terminates. That is, identifying R with its
lattice homology H´ pRq, M is defined to be the FrU s-submodule spanned by the elements of
S. This is clearly a monotone root; see Figure 5 for an example.

..
.

..
.

Figure 5. A graded root (left) and its monotone subroot (right).
The essential claim of this section is now:
Theorem 6.1. Let R be a symmetric graded root. Then pC˚ pRq, J0 q is locally equivalent to
pC˚ pM q, J0 q, where M is the monotone subroot of R constructed above.
Proof. Let R be a symmetric graded root with either 2n ´ 1 or 2n leaves, and select a pair
of tips from each nontrivial cluster as described above. Before we begin the proof, it will be
convenient to assume that R has the following technical property with regard to the ordering
of its leaves. Let Cb be any nontrivial cluster in R. We require that out of all of the leaves of R
contained in Cb , the tips of Cb are closest to the vertical line of symmetry in the lexicographic
ordering (i.e., have indices closest to n). Such a property can easily be achieved by permuting

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

23

the order of the leaves within each cluster in such a way that does not change the isomorphism
class of R. If this property is satisfied, we say that R is nicely ordered.
In order to provide some intuition for the proof, we first construct a pair of maps between
H˚ pM q and H˚ pRq on the homological level. There is an obvious FrU s-equivariant map F :
H˚ pM q Ñ H˚ pRq given by the inclusion of M into R. To define a map G : H˚ pRq Ñ H˚ pM q,
let v be any vertex of R lying to the left of the vertical line of symmetry. If v already lies in
M , then we define Gpvq “ v. Otherwise, we define Gpvq to be the closest vertex in M with
grading grpvq that lies to the right of v. (Here we identify vertices with their corresponding
representatives in the homology.) See Figure 6.
v3
v5

..
.
Figure 6. The left half of a graded root R and its monotone subroot M . In
this example, M is spanned by v3 (and J0 v3 ) and v5 . Arrows give the action of
G : H˚ pRq Ñ H˚ pM q on the vertices of R not in M .
This defines G for vertices to the left of the stem; we extend G to all the vertices of R in
the obvious J0 -equivariant way. The fact that M is monotone (as well as the assumption that
R is nicely ordered) ensures that G is equivariant with respect to the action of U . We think of
G as “folding” M into R by collapsing all of the vertices of R outside of M towards the center
line.
We now show that F and G are induced by actual J0 -equivariant chain maps between C˚ pM q
and C˚ pRq. Let v1 , . . . , vn be the generators of C˚ pRq lying to the left of the center line, and
let i1 ă i2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă ik “ n be the indices of the leaves in the left half of R which lie in S.
In order to remember the fact that M is a subroot of R, it will be convenient to enumerate
the even generators of C˚ pM q by vi1 , . . . , vik (and their reflections), rather than by using the
indices 1 through k. We denote the odd generators of C˚ pM q likewise by βi1 , . . . , βik´1 (and
their reflections), so that Bβij is the sum of U -powers of vij and vij`1 . It is not hard to see that
(as angles in R) βij and αij are based at the same vertex and have the same sides. However,
βij should not be identified with αij as an element of C˚ pM q, since Bαij is the sum of U -powers
of vij and vij `1 . (The index here is ij ` 1, instead of ij`1 .)
We now construct a chain map f : C˚ pM q Ñ C˚ pRq. On the even part of C˚ pM q, we define
this to be the inclusion sending vij as a generator of C˚ pM q to vij as a generator of C˚ pRq.
For βij an odd generator of C˚ pRq, we define
ij`1 ´1

f pβij q “

ÿ
s“ij

U pgrpαs q´grpβij qq{2 αs .

24

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

One can check that grpβij q “ grpαij q ď grpαs q for all ij ď s ă ij`1 due to the monotonicity
of M and the fact that R is nicely ordered. This defines f on generators of C˚ pRq to the left
of the center line; we extend f to generators on the right side of the center line in the obvious
J0 -equivariant way. Then f gives a J0 -equivariant chain map from C˚ pM q to C˚ pRq which
induces the map F on homology. The reader may find it helpful to consult Figure 7.
β1
v1

v1
v2 v3

v2

v3
α2

α1
..
.

..
.

..
.

..
.

..
.

..
.

Figure 7. The left half of a graded root R and its monotone subroot M ,
together with (half of) the complexes C˚ pRq and C˚ pM q. In this example,
i1 “ 1 and i2 “ 3, so M is spanned by v1 (and J0 v1 ) and v3 . The generator β1
of C˚ pM q has boundary v1 `U 3 v3 and has grading equal to that of α1 (although
not drawn that way).
Finally, we construct a chain map g : C˚ pRq Ñ C˚ pM q. Let vs be an even generator of
C˚ pRq lying to the left of the stem, and let ij be the least element of i1 , . . . , ik greater than or
equal to s. Again due to the structure of M and R, it is not hard to see that grpvs q ď grpvij q.
We thus define
gpvs q “ U pgrpvij q´grpvs qq{2 vij ,
extending J0 -equivariantly for generators to the right of the center line. Now let αs be an odd
generator of C˚ pRq. If s is an element of i1 , . . . , ik , we define gpαs q “ βs ; otherwise, we define
gpαs q “ 0 (again extending to all of C˚ pRq J0 -equivariantly). We leave it to the reader to
check that g is a chain map which induces G. See Figure 7.
It is not hard to see that F and G induce the isomorphisms described above, between H˚ pM q
and H˚ pRq after inverting the action of U . This completes the proof.

If R is a symmetric graded root, it turns out that the monotone root associated to R is an
invariant of pC˚ pRq, J0 q up to local equivalence. Indeed, as a counterpart to Theorem 6.1, we
have the following result:
Theorem 6.2. Let M and M 1 be two monotone roots, with involutions J0 and J01 . If pC˚ pM q, J0 q
and pC˚ pM 1 q, J01 q are locally equivalent ι-complexes, then M “ M 1 .
1 q. Let v , . . . , v ,
Proof. Let us write M “ M ph1 , r1 ; . . . ; hn , rn q and M 1 “ M ph11 , r11 ; . . . ; h1m , rm
1
n
1 , J 1 v 1 , . . . , J 1 v 1 the leaves of M 1 . We allow
J0 vn , . . . , J0 v1 be the leaves of M , and v11 , . . . , vm
0 m
0 1
for the possibility that M has an invariant leaf vn “ J0 vn . Similarly, M 1 may have an invariant
1 “ J 1 v1 .
leaf vm
0 m
A local equivalence between pC˚ pM q, J0 q and pC˚ pM 1 q, J01 q induces a grading-preserving map
on homology
F : H˚ pM q Ñ H˚ pM 1 q

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

25

which commutes with the involutions and the U -actions and is an isomorphism in sufficiently
low degrees.
Given a leaf vi for 1 ď i ď n, write F pvi q as a linear combination of the leaves of M 1 , with
the coefficients being powers of U . Note that all the terms in this sum (being in the same
grading) become equal after multiplication with U k for k " 0. Since F is an FrU s-module
map, it follows from considering F pU k vi q that F pvi q must contain an odd number of terms.
Hence, our sum cannot consist only of paired terms U l vj1 ` U l J01 vj1 . There is at least one value
of j P t1, . . . , mu such that exactly one of vj1 and J01 vj1 appears in F pvi q (with coefficient some
1 “ v 1 ) and U l v 1 appears in
power of U ), or otherwise vj1 is invariant (that is, j “ m and J0 vm
m
j
F pvi q. We denote by f piq “ j the maximal j with this property.
Without loss of generality, let us assume that U l vj1 , rather than its conjugate, appears in
F pvi q. Since F is grading-preserving, we then have that
hi “ h1j ´ 2l ď h1j .
Moreover, the element U phi ´ri q{2 vi is J0 -invariant, and hence so is its image under F . Again
by considering F pU k vi q for k " 0, this implies that F pU phi ´ri q{2 vi q contains an element in the
central stem of M 1 . Given how we chose j, that element must be a multiple of vj1 , namely
U l`phi ´ri q{2 vj1 . Since the grading of this is equal to ri , we have that ri ď rj1 .
We deduce that there exists a function f : t1, . . . , nu Ñ t1, . . . , mu for which
hi ď h1f piq and ri ď rf1 piq for all i “ 1, . . . , n.
On the other hand, the local equivalence also gives a map in the other direction, from H˚ pM 1 q
to H˚ pM q, with similar properties. Thus, we get a function g : t1, . . . , mu Ñ t1, . . . , nu such
that
h1j ď hgpjq and rj1 ď rgpjq for all j “ 1, . . . , m.
Considering the composition g ˝ f , we obtain hi ď hgpf piqq for all i. Since M is monotone,
this means that i ě gpf piqq for all i. However, we also have that ri ď rgpf piqq , which implies the
opposite inequality i ď gpf piqq. The only possibility is that gpf piqq “ i, so g ˝ f is the identity.
By the same argument, the composition f ˝ g is the identity. We thus conclude that f and
g are inverses to each other, and in particular that n “ m, hi “ h1i and ri “ ri1 for all i. This
shows M and M 1 are identical.

7. Tensor products
In this section, we compute the involutive correction terms for the tensor product of any
number of monotone roots. For such complexes, we will be able to express d¯I and dI explicitly
in terms of the parameters pri , hi q of each of the summands. Because of Theorem 6.1, these
computations easily extend to the class of symmetric graded roots in general.
Before we begin, it will be helpful to re-cast our definition of C˚ pRq in a geometric form
similar to the construction of lattice homology given in Section 2.3. Let R be a symmetric
graded root and let g be any even integer. For each even generator U n vi of C˚ pRq lying in
grading g, we draw a single 0-cell as in Figure 8, placing these on a horizontal line from leftto-right in the same order as they appear in C˚ pRq. For each odd generator U n αi of C˚ pRq in
grading g ` 1, we then draw a 1-cell connecting the two 0-cells corresponding to the terms in
BU n αi . See Figure 8.
For convenience, we suppress writing the appropriate powers of U and label these 0-cells
and 1-cells with the vertex and angle labels vi and αi of Section 4. Thus a 0-cell marked vi
in grading g means that (a) grpvi q ě g and (b) the 0-cell in question represents the chain

26

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

v1

v4

v1

v4

S0
v2

v3
S´2

α2

S´4

α1 α3

S´6

v1

v2

v3

v4

v1

v2 α2 v3

v4

v1 α1 v2 α2 v3 α3 v4

..
.
Figure 8. Different sublevel sets for a graded root. The leaves v1 and v4 in
this example have grading zero.
U pgrpvi q´gq{2 vi . Similarly, a 1-cell marked αi means that (a) grpαi q ě g ` 1 and (b) the 0-cell
in question represents the chain U pgrpαi q´pg`1qq{2 αi .
By a slight abuse of notation, we call the (one-dimensional) cubical complex constructed
above the sublevel set of weight g and denote it by Sg . We give the cellular chain complex of
this sublevel set a slightly modified grading by declaring a chain of dimension i to have grading
g ` i. It is clear that the chain complexes of these sublevel sets give a geometric model for
C˚ pRq. More precisely, let C˚ pSg q be the graded chain complex
à
Ci pSg , Z{2Zq,
C˚ pSg q “
i

where Ci pSg , Z{2Zq is the usual i-dimensional cellular chain group of Sg over Z{2Z with the
modified grading g ` i. Then we have an isomorphism
à
C˚ pRq –
C˚ pSg q
g even

of graded chain complexes over FrU s, where the action of U on the right is given by the induced
inclusion map of Sg into Sg´2 . Passing to homology gives an isomorphism between H˚ pRq and
the Z{2Z-homology of the sublevel sets.
Now let R1 , . . . , Rk be a set of k symmetric graded roots, and denote by C˚ pΣq the tensor
product complex C˚ pR1 q b ¨ ¨ ¨ b C˚ pRk q. Let the dimension of any x1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b xk be given by
the sum of the dimensions of each of the xi . As before, for every even integer g we construct a
k-dimensional cubical complex Sg by first drawing a 0-cell for each zero-dimensional generator
of C˚ pΣq in grading g. These are arranged in the obvious way as a subset of points in some
k-dimensional product lattice (see Figure 9). For each d-dimensional generator of grading
g ` d in C˚ pΣq, we likewise draw a d-dimensional lattice cube in such a way so that the cellular
boundary coincides with the action of B on C˚ pΣq. This gives a geometric model for C˚ pΣq.
See Figure 9.
Note that every lattice cube may be labeled by x “ x1 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b xk , where each xi is either
a leaf or angle generator of Ri . As before, we suppress writing the necessary power of U , so
that a lattice cube of dimension d labeled by x means that (a) grpxq ě g ` d and (b) the cube
in question represents the chain U pgrpxq´pg`dqq{2 x. If this holds, then we refer to x as “lying in
the sublevel set Sg ”. Note also that Sg is symmetric about reflection by J0 in each coordinate.
We now come to the following important lemma:

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

27

Figure 9. Example of a sublevel set for the connected sum of two roots (k “ 2).
Points (0-cells) represent generators x “ x1 b x2 where both x1 and x2 are leaf
generators; edges (1-cells) represent generators where precisely one of x1 and
x2 is an angle generator; squares (2-cells) represent generators where both of
the xi are angle generators. Note the symmetry about each coordinate axis.
Lemma 7.1. Let R1 , . . . , Rk be symmetric graded roots. Denote by pC˚ pΣq, J0 q the tensor
product complex C˚ pR1 qb¨ ¨ ¨bC˚ pRk q with the reflection involution J0 b¨ ¨ ¨bJ0 . In sufficiently
low gradings, the involutive homology HI ´ pΣ, J0 q :“ HI ´ pC˚ pΣq, J0 q consists of a single U tower in even gradings and a single U -tower in odd gradings, with the action of Q taking the
odd tower onto the even tower. Then:
(1) In sufficiently low even gradings, the single generator of HI ´ pΣ, J0 q is represented by
Qx, where x “ x1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` x2n`1 is the sum of an odd number of points (0-cells) in Sg .
Every representative is of this form and any two such choices are homologous.
(2) In sufficiently low odd gradings, the single generator of HI ´ pΣ, J0 q is represented by a
pair px, Qyq, where x is the sum of an odd number of 0-cells in Sg and y is some sum
of 1-cells in Sg such that By “ x ` J0 x. Every representative is of this form and any
two such choices are homologous.
Proof. We first observe that J0 preserves dimension. Thus we may filter the mapping cone
of pC˚ pΣq, J0 q to obtain the double complex depicted in Figure 10. Here, we have used Ci to
denote the i-dimensional generators (of any grading) in C˚ pΣq. Consider the spectral sequence
from this double complex to the associated graded of HI ´ pΣ, J0 q. In sufficiently low gradings,
the sublevel sets Sg are contractible, being solid k-dimensional boxes. In these gradings the
spectral sequence collapses to give an F-summand in place of C0 and QC0 and zeros elsewhere.
This implies that in low gradings, HI ´ pΣ, J0 q is generated (in even gradings) by some element
of QC0 and (in odd gradings) by some sum of elements in C0 and QC1 . Examining the
definition of the mapping cone then proves the claim.

We now come to the computation of d¯I and dI for connected sums. Here we will finally
make use of the class of monotone roots constructed in the previous section. The statement
of our theorem is a bit cumbersome, but the rationale behind various expressions will become
clear after embarking on the proof.
Theorem 7.2. For 1 ď i ď k, let Mi be the monotone root
Mi “ M phi1 , r1i ; . . . ; hini , rni i q.
Denote by HI ´ pΣ, J0 q the involutive homology of the complex C˚ pM1 q b ¨ ¨ ¨ b C˚ pMk q with
respect to the tensor product involution J0 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b J0 . Let d¯I pΣq and dI pΣq be the involutive

28

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

..
.
Qp1`J0 q

C2

QC2

B

B
Qp1`J0 q

C1

QC1

B

B
Qp1`J0 q

C0

QC0

Figure 10. Mapping cone of pC˚ pΣq, J0 q.
correction terms of HI ´ pΣ, J0 q. Then
˜
d¯I pΣq “

k
ÿ

¸
hi1

` 2.

i“1

For each tuple of integers ps1 , . . . , sk q with 1 ď si ď ni , define
Bps1 , . . . , sk q “ mintrs11 ` h2s2 ` h3s3 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` hksk ,
h1s1 ` rs22 ` h3s3 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` hksk ,
h1s1 ` h2s2 ` rs33 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` hksk ,
..
.
h1s1 ` h2s2 ` h3s3 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` rskk u.
Then
dI pΣq “ max Bps1 , . . . , sk q ` 2,
ps1 ,...,sk q

where the maximum is taken over all tuples ps1 , . . . , sk q with 1 ď si ď ni .
Proof. We begin with d¯I . According to its definition in Section 2.1, we search for elements in
HI ´ pΣ, J0 q that have nonzero U -powers U n for every n ě 0 and eventually lie in the image of
Q. By Lemma 7.1, such an element must be represented by a chain Qx, where x is the sum of
an odd number of points in some sublevel set. Consider the single point x “ v11 b v12 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b v1k .
Then x has grading h11 ` h21 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` hk1 . There are no zero-dimensional generators of higher
grading in C˚ pΣq, since each v1i has maximal grading amongst the zero-dimensional generators
of C˚ pMi q. This proves the claim for d¯I .
We now turn to dI . According to Lemma 7.1, we search for sublevel sets containing a pair
px, Qyq, where x is the sum of an odd number 0-cells and y is a sum of 1-cells for which
By “ x ` J0 x. Fix any tuple of integers ps1 , . . . , sk q with 1 ď si ď ni . We begin by explicitly
producing such a pair px, Qyq in the sublevel set of weight Bps1 , . . . , sk q. Since this element
has grading Bps1 , . . . , sk q ` 1 in HI ´ pΣ, J0 q, if we can do this for every choice of ps1 , . . . , sk q,
this will imply that dI is bounded below by
dI pΣq ě max Bps1 , . . . , sk q ` 2.
ps1 ,...,sk q

Let x be the single point x “ vs11 b vs22 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b vskk . To see that this lies in SBps1 ,...,sk q , observe
that the grading of x is given by h1s1 ` h2s2 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` hksk . Since for each Mi , the r-parameters are

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

29

all less than or equal to the h-parameters, we certainly have grpxq ě Bps1 , . . . , sk q. Hence x
lies in SBps1 ,...,sk q .
We now produce a path γ in SBps1 ,...,sk q from x to J0 x which will serve as the desired y.
(Here, by a path we mean a sum of 1-cells which topologically constitutes a simple curve.)
First consider the straight-line path γ 1 from x to the point
x1 “ pJ0 vs11 q b vs22 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b vskk
consisting of the edges
2n1 ÿ
´s1 ´1

αi1 b vs22 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b vskk .

i“s1

We claim that this path lies in SBps1 ,...,sk q . Indeed, the first and last edges in this path have
grading
prs11 ` 1q ` h2s2 ` h3s3 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` hksk
and thus lie in SBps1 ,...,sk q . Because M1 is monotone, the gradings of angle generators in C˚ pM1 q
increase as we move towards the stem. Hence the intermediate edges in the above path all
have gradings greater than that of the first and last, and thus also lie in SBps1 ,...,sk q .
Now let
xpiq “ pJ0 vs11 q b pJ0 vs22 q b ¨ ¨ ¨ b pJ0 vsi i q b vsi`1
b vsi`2
b ¨ ¨ ¨ b vskk .
i`1
i`2
We similarly have straight-line paths from xpiq to xpi`1q lying in SBps1 ,...,sk q for each i. Concatenating these together gives the desired path γ from x to J0 x. Since this construction holds
for any tuple ps1 , . . . , sk q, we have
dI pΣq ě max Bps1 , . . . , sk q ` 2,
ps1 ,...,sk q

as claimed. See Figure 11 for a schematic picture of γ.
pJ0 vs11 q b pJ0 vs22 q

vs11 b vs22

pJ0 vs11 q b vs22

Figure 11. Example of γ.
The reason the above argument does not establish equality is that not every pair px, Qyq must
consist of a symmetric pair of points together with a “rectangular” path between them. Indeed,
in general x need not be a single point and y need not be a simple curve. Even if this were the
case, it is not clear that y would have to be of the form presented in Figure 11. We thus use a
slightly different argument to prove the reverse inequality.
Let ps1 , . . . , sk q be a tuple of integers with 1 ď si ď ni . We say that a point vj11 bvj22 b¨ ¨ ¨bvjkk
lies within the box Ips1 , . . . , sk q if si ď ji ď 2ni ` 1 ´ si for each i. Geometrically, this means
that each coordinate vjii lies between vsi i and its reflection. We say that a path γ is bounded by
Ips1 , . . . , sk q if each vertex in the path is contained in Ips1 , . . . , sk q. See Figure 12.

30

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

vs11 b pJ0 vs22 q

pJ0 vs11 q b pJ0 vs22 q

vs11 b vs22

pJ0 vs11 q b vs22

Figure 12. A path γ bounded by Ips1 , s2 q.
Now suppose that Sg is a sublevel set containing a pair px, Qyq for which By “ x ` J0 x, as in
Lemma 7.1. For the moment, let us assume that we are in the simplest case where x consists
of a single point and y consists of a path γ between x and J0 x. Let ps1 , . . . , sk q be the largest
possible integers 1 ď si ď ni for which γ is bounded by Ips1 , . . . , sk q. Geometrically, this
corresponds to finding the smallest possible symmetric “box” into which γ fits, as in Figure
12. We claim that γ must either contain some edge of the form
αs11 b vj22 b vj33 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b vjkk
or some edge of the form
pJ0 αs11 q b vj22 b vj33 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b vjkk .
This follows from the minimality of the box Ips1 , . . . , sk q and the fact that γ connects x with
J0 x. Indeed, γ must either contain a point of the form
vs11 b vj22 b vj33 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b vjkk
or a point of the form
pJ0 vs11 q b vj22 b vj33 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b vjkk
by the fact that s1 is maximal. On the other hand, the first coordinates of points in γ cannot
all be either vs11 or J0 vs11 , since γ connects x with J0 x and the first coordinates of these two
points differ. This implies that γ contains an edge of the form described above.
Now observe that the grading of this edge is given by
prs11 ` 1q ` h2j2 ` h3j3 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` hkjk .
Since all of the Ri are monotone and γ stays entirely within Ips1 , . . . , sk q, we additionally have
that hiji ď hisi for each i. Hence the above expression is less than or equal to
prs11 ` 1q ` h2s2 ` h3s3 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` hksk .
This bounds g ` 1 from above, since Sg contains an edge if and only if the grading of that edge
is greater than or equal to g ` 1. Repeating this argument for each of the k ´ 1 other indices
yields
g ` 1 ď Bps1 , . . . , sk q ` 1.
Now suppose that we are in the situation where x is the sum of multiple 0-cells and y is not
necessarily a simple curve. We claim that without loss of generality, we may still assume that
Sg contains a path γ between a symmetric pair of points, as discussed above. To see this, first
observe that a straightforward parity argument shows x ` J0 x must be equal to the sum of
an odd number of symmetric pairs of points. More precisely, some symmetric pairs of points
might appear in the expansion of x and thus cancel each other out in x ` J0 x, but because x

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

31

is the sum of an odd number of points, an odd number of symmetric pairs in x ` J0 x must
remain.
Now, if x ` J0 x is equal to the sum of a single symmetric pair of points, then clearly y must
contain a path between these even if y itself is not a simple curve. Thus, suppose that this is
not the case. Fix any 0-cell p appearing in the expansion of x ` J0 x. If y contains a path γ
from p to J0 p, then we are done. If not, then y must contain a path γ from p to some other
0-cell q ‰ J0 p appearing in the expansion of x ` J0 x. Set
x1 “ x ` p ` q
and
y 1 “ y ` γ ` J0 γ.
Then px1 , Qy 1 q is another pair in Sg for which By 1 “ x1 ` J0 x1 . However, x1 ` J0 x1 now contains
two fewer symmetric pairs than x ` J0 x, since both p ` J0 p and q ` J0 q appear in the expansion
of x ` J0 x. Repeating this procedure inductively reduces to the case when x ` J0 x is equal to
the sum of a single symmetric pair of points and establishes the claim.
We have thus shown that if Sg contains a pair px, Qyq as described in Lemma 7.1, then g is
bounded above by Bps1 , . . . , sk q ` 1 for some ps1 , . . . , sk q. Hence certainly
dI pΣq ď max Bps1 , . . . , sk q ` 2,
ps1 ,...,sk q

completing the proof.


8. Applications

8.1. Involutive correction terms of connected sums. We now re-phrase the results of
the previous section in terms of connected sums of actual AR manifolds. Let Y be a threemanifold given as the oriented boundary of an almost-rational plumbing, and let s “ rks be
a self-conjugate spinc -structure on Y . Denote by R the (shifted) graded root Rk rσ ` 2s. As
in Section 6, R has a monotone subroot M parameterized by some tuple of rational numbers
M “ M ph1 , r1 ; . . . ; hn , rn q. These parameters are related to d and µ̄ by
¯ sq “ dpY, sq “ h1 ` 2
dpY,
and
dpY, sq “ ´2µ̄pY, sq “ rn ` 2,
as can be seen from the proof of Theorem 1.2. Note that if M only has two parameters h1 and
r1 , then M is evidently specified by d and µ̄.
Remark 8.1. Let R be a symmetric graded root, and Rr its vertical reflection, which is a
downwards-opening graded root. Let v be the vertex of minimal grading in Rr which is
invariant under ι. In [25, Section 5.2], Stoffregen defined Rr to be of projective type if there
exists a vertex w of minimal grading and a path from v to w that is grading-decreasing at each
step. It is not hard to see that this corresponds precisely to the case when n “ 1 above.
As described in the Introduction, it will be helpful for us to re-parameterize M in general
by defining the quantities
di pY, sq “ hi ` 2
and
2µ̄i pY, sq “ ´ri ´ 2,
for i “ 1, . . . , n, so that d “ d1 and µ̄ “ µ̄n . In addition, we define
2δ̃i pY, sq “ di pY, sq ` 2µ̄i pY, sq “ hi ´ ri .

32

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

This parameterization is not particularly special, but we re-phrase our results in this language
to more closely correspond with e.g. Theorem 1.4 of [24]. Note that, in view of Theorems 6.1
and 6.2, the local equivalence class of pCF ´ pY, sq, ιq is determined by the quantities di and µ̄i .
We now prove a few of the results advertised in the Introduction.
Proof of Theorem 1.3. According to Theorem 1.1 of [9], the involutive Floer complex of a
connected sum is homotopy equivalent to the (grading shifted) tensor product of the involutive
complexes of the individual summands. Moreover, according to Lemma 8.7 of [9], the relation of
local equivalence is preserved under tensor product. Putting these together with Theorem 4.5,
we thus have a local equivalence between the pairs
pC˚ pΣqr´2pk ´ 1qs, J0 q – pCF ´ pY1 # . . . #Yk , s1 # . . . #sk q, ιq,
where C˚ pΣq is the tensor product complex of Theorem 7.2. The theorem immediately follows
by taking into account this grading shift and substituting in our new parameters. Note that
d1 pYi , si q “ dpYi , si q.

Proof of Corollary 1.4. Fix any N ps1 , . . . , sk q as in Theorem 1.3. By replacing the maximum
over i in the original definition of N ps1 , . . . , sk q with the particular value i “ k, we obtain the
inequality
˜
¸
k
´
¯
ÿ
N ps1 , . . . , sk q ď
dsi pYi , si q ´ 2δ̃sk pYk , sk q .
i“1

The right-hand side is then equal to
˜
k´1
ÿ

¸
dsi pYi , si q

´ 2µ̄sk pYk , sk q,

i“1

which in turn is less than or equal to
´k´1
ÿ

¯
dpYi , si q ´ 2µ̄pYk , sk q.

i“1

Where here we have used the fact that d “ d1 ě di and µ̄ “ µ̄n ď µ̄i .
Applying Theorem 1.3(b), we get
´k´1
¯
ÿ
(11)
dpY1 # . . . #Yk , s1 # . . . #sk q ď
dpYi , si q ´ 2µ̄pYk , sk q,
i“1

as desired.
Now suppose that all of the pYi , si q are of projective type. Then the only valid tuple
ps1 , . . . , sk q in Theorem 1.3 is p1, 1, . . . , 1q. Moreover, for each i we have δ̃1 pYi , si q “ δ̃pYi , si q
since µ̄1 pYi , si q “ µ̄pYi , si q. It follows that we get equality in (11).

Proof of Corollary 1.5. We first observe that for self-connected sums, to compute d in Theorem
1.3(b) it suffices to consider the maximum of N ps1 , . . . , sk q over homogeneous tuples with every
coordinate equal. Indeed, fix any ps1 , . . . , sk q, and suppose that sj is the least element of
s1 , . . . , sk . Then
˜
¸
k
´
¯
ÿ
N ps1 , . . . , sk q ď
dsi pY, sq ´ 2δ̃sj pY, sq ,
i“1

where we have replaced the maximum over i in the original definition of N ps1 , . . . , sk q with
the particular value i “ j. This is less than or equal to
k ¨ dsj pY, sq ´ 2δ̃sj pY, sq “ N psj , . . . , sj q.

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

33

Hence it suffices to maximize over homogenous tuples, proving the claim.
Now suppose that k is large. All of the δ̃i are bounded in magnitude, while d “ d1 is greater
than any of the other di . It is thus clear that as k grows to infinity, the expression in the
corollary will eventually stabilize to k ¨ dpY, sq ´ 2δ̃1 pY, sq. This completes the proof.

8.2. Mixing orientations. Given an ι-complex pC, ιq, there is a dual ι-complex pC _ , ι_ q;
cf. [9, Section 8.3]. When pC, ιq is the Heegaard Floer ι-complex for some rational homology
sphere pY, sq, the results of [8, Section 4.2] show that its dual is the Heegaard Floer ι-complex
for the same manifold, with the opposite orientation.
Since Theorem 4.5 already gives models for the Heegaard Floer ι-complexes associated to AR
plumbed 3-manifolds, by dualizing we get models for the Heegaard Floer ι-complexes of those
manifolds with the opposite orientation. From here, by tensoring and then taking the involutive
homology, we can calculate HFI ´ for any connected sum of AR plumbed 3-manifolds, where
the summands may come with either orientation. We do not have closed formulas for d and d¯
in this case, but we can do ad hoc computations in any particular example.
Proof of Theorem 1.6. We will make use of the calculations in [9, Section 9.2], for the manifold
3
3
Y 1 “ S´3
pT2,7 q#S´3
pT2,7 q#S53 p´T2,11 q

This differs from Y in that we take large surgeries on the respective knots, instead of ˘1
surgeries. The end result of the calculations there was [9, Proposition 1.5], which says that
dpY 1 q “ ´2,

dpY 1 q “ 0,

¯ 1 q “ 2.
dpY

3 pT q is of projective type, with d “ 0 and µ̄ “ 2
In our setting, note that Σp2, 7, 15q “ S´1
2,7
(cf. [15, Section 5] and [25, Section 5.2]). Thus, for the purposes of computing involutive
correction terms, we can replace CF ´ pΣp2, 7, 15qq with a locally equivalent ι-complex, associated to the simple graded root that starts in degree ´2 and splits in degree ´6. A picture of
this complex is shown in Figure 13(a). Observe that this is the same as the complex used to
3 pT qq in [9, Figure 14], except shifted upward in grading by 1{2.
compute CF ´ pS´3
2,7
3 pT
Similarly, Σp2, 11, 23q “ S´1
2,11 q is of projective type, with d “ 0 and µ̄ “ 3. We replace
´
CF pΣp2, 11, 23qq with the locally equivalent ι-complex shown in Figure 13(b). Furthermore,
CF ´ p´Σp2, 11, 23qq “ CF ´ pS13 p´T2,11 qq is the dual to CF ´ pΣp2, 11, 23q in the sense of ιcomplexes; cf. [9, Theorem 1.8 and Section 8.3]. When we take the dual of the complex in
Figure 13(b) we obtain the one in Figure 13(c). This turns out to be the same as the complex
used to compute CF ´ pS53 p´T2,11 qq in [9, Figure 20], except shifted downward by 1.
This implies that the calculations in [9, Section 9.2] work for Y just as for Y 1 , with a total
degree shift of 1{2 ` 1{2 ´ 1 “ 0. Hence, the correction terms d, d, d¯ are the same for Y as for
Y 1.


8.3. An infinite rank subgroup in homology cobordism. Using the techniques developed
in this paper, we now give a new proof that Θ3Z has a Z8 subgroup.
Proof of Theorem 1.7. Consider the Brieskorn spheres
Yp “ Σpp, 2p ´ 1, 2p ` 1q, p ě 3, p odd.
Stoffregen [24, Theorem 8.9] showed that Yp is of projective type, with dpYp q “ p ´ 1 and
µ̄pYp q “ 0.

34

IRVING DAI AND CIPRIAN MANOLESCU

´2

3

´4

1

´6

´1

´8

´3

´2
´4
´6

...

...

...

paq

´5

...

...

...

...

´10

...

...

´8

pbq

pcq

Figure 13. Complexes locally equivalent to: (a) CF ´ pΣp2, 7, 15qq; (b)
CF ´ pΣp2, 11, 23qq; (c) CF ´ p´Σp2, 11, 23qq. Solid lines represent the action of
U , and dashed lines represent the action of B, as usual. Homological degrees
are indicated on the left side of each picture.
Using Theorem 1.3 and Corollary 1.4, we can calculate the involutive correction terms of
connected sums of Yp ’s. Specifically, if p1 ď p2 ď ¨ ¨ ¨ ď pk , then
¯ p # . . . #Yp q “
dpY
1
k

k
ÿ

dpYpi q,

dpYp1 # . . . #Ypk q “

i“1

k´1
ÿ

dpYpi q.

i“1

Hence,
(12)

pd¯ ´ dqpYp1 # . . . #Ypk q “ dpYpk q “ pk ´ 1.

We claim that the classes rYp s P Θ3Z are linearly independent, so they generate a Z8 subgroup. Indeed, suppose we had a linear relation between the classes rYp s. By grouping the
terms according to the sign of their coefficient, we can write the relation as
(13)

rYp1 s ` rYp2 s ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` rYpk s “ rYp11 s ` rYp12 s ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` rYp1l s,

where
p1 ď p2 ď ¨ ¨ ¨ ď pk , p11 ď p12 ď ¨ ¨ ¨ ď p1l ,
and
pi ‰ p1j for any i, j.
Since d¯ and d are homology cobordism invariants, so is their difference d¯´ d. By applying (12)
to both sides of (13), we find that pk “ p1l , which is a contradiction.

References
[1] M. Artin, Some numerical criteria for contractability of curves on algebraic surfaces, Amer. J. Math.,
84(1962), 485–496.
[2] M. Artin, On isolated rational singularities of surfaces, Amer. J. Math., 88(1966), 129–136.
[3] M. Borodzik and J. Hom, Involutive Heegaard Floer homology and rational cuspidal curves, e-print, arXiv:
1609.08303.
[4] S. Boyer, C. M. Gordon, and L. Watson, On L-spaces and left-orderable fundamental groups, Math. Ann.,
356(2013), no. 4, 1213–1245.

INVOLUTIVE HEEGAARD FLOER HOMOLOGY AND PLUMBED THREE-MANIFOLDS

35

[5] I. Dai, On the Pin(2)-equivariant monopole Floer homology of plumbed 3-manifolds, e-print, arXiv:1607.
03171.
[6] R. Fintushel and R. J. Stern, Instanton homology of Seifert fibred homology three spheres, Proc. London
Math. Soc. (3), 61(1990), no. 1, 109–137.
[7] M. Furuta, Homology cobordism group of homology 3-spheres, Invent. Math., 100(1990), no. 2, 339–355.
[8] K. Hendricks and C. Manolescu, Involutive Heegaard Floer homology, Duke Math. J., 166(2017), no. 7,
1211–1299.
[9] K. Hendricks, C. Manolescu, and I. Zemke, A connected sum formula for involutive Heegaard Floer homology, e-print, arXiv:1607.07499.
[10] A. Juhász and D. P. Thurston, Naturality and mapping class groups in Heegaard Floer homology, e-print,
arXiv:1210.4996.
[11] T. Lidman and C. Manolescu, The equivalence of two Seiberg-Witten Floer homologies, e-print (2016),
arxiv:1603.00582.
[12] F. Lin, Morse-Bott singularities in monopole Floer homology and the triangulation conjecture, e-print,
arXiv:1404.4561.
[13] C. Manolescu, Pin(2)-equivariant Seiberg-Witten Floer homology and the triangulation conjecture, J. Amer.
Math. Soc., 29(2016), no. 1, 147–176.
[14] A. Némethi, On the Ozsváth-Szabó invariant of negative definite plumbed 3-manifolds, Geom. Topol.,
9(2005), 991–1042.
[15] A. Némethi, Graded roots and singularities, in Singularities in geometry and topology, World Sci. Publ.,
Hackensack, NJ, pp. 394–463, 2007.
[16] A. Némethi, Lattice cohomology of normal surface singularities, Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci., 44(2008), no. 2,
507–543.
[17] W. D. Neumann, An invariant of plumbed homology spheres, in Topology Symposium, Siegen 1979 (Proc.
Sympos., Univ. Siegen, Siegen, 1979), Springer, Berlin, volume 788 of Lecture Notes in Math., pp. 125–144,
1980.
[18] P. S. Ozsváth and Z. Szabó, Absolutely graded Floer homologies and intersection forms for four-manifolds
with boundary, Adv. Math., 173(2003), no. 2, 179–261.
[19] P. S. Ozsváth and Z. Szabó, On the Floer homology of plumbed three-manifolds, Geometry and Topology,
7(2003), 185–224.
[20] P. S. Ozsváth and Z. Szabó, Holomorphic disks and three-manifold invariants: properties and applications,
Ann. of Math. (2), 159(2004), no. 3, 1159–1245.
[21] P. S. Ozsváth and Z. Szabó, Holomorphic disks and topological invariants for closed three-manifolds, Ann.
of Math. (2), 159(2004), no. 3, 1027–1158.
[22] P. S. Ozsváth and Z. Szabó, Holomorphic triangles and invariants for smooth four-manifolds, Adv. Math.,
202(2006), no. 2, 326–400.
[23] L. Siebenmann, On vanishing of the Rohlin invariant and nonfinitely amphicheiral homology 3-spheres, in
Topology Symposium, Siegen 1979 (Proc. Sympos., Univ. Siegen, Siegen, 1979), Springer, Berlin, volume
788 of Lecture Notes in Math., pp. 172–222, 1980.
[24] M. Stoffregen, Manolescu invariants of connected sums, e-print, arXiv:1510.01286.
[25] M. Stoffregen, Pin(2)-equivariant Seiberg-Witten Floer homology of Seifert fibrations, e-print, arXiv:1505.
03234.
[26] E. Tweedy, Heegaard Floer homology and several families of Brieskorn spheres, Topology Appl., 160(2013),
no. 4, 620–632.
[27] I. Zemke, Graph cobordisms and Heegaard Floer homology, e-print, arXiv:1512.01184.
Department of Mathematics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540
E-mail address: idai@math.princeton.edu
Department of Mathematics, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095
E-mail address: cm@math.ucla.edu

