ENGEL GROUPS AND UNIVERSAL SURGERY MODELS

arXiv:1707.07800v1 [math.GT] 25 Jul 2017

MICHAEL FREEDMAN AND VYACHESLAV KRUSHKAL ∗

Abstract. We introduce a collection of 1/2 - π1 -null 4 -dimensional surgery problems. This is an intermediate notion between the classically studied universal
surgery models and the π1 -null kernels which are known to admit a solution in
the topological category. Using geometric applications of the group-theoretic 2 Engel relation, we show that the 1/2 - π1 -null surgery problems are universal, in
the sense that solving them is equivalent to establishing 4 -dimensional topological
surgery for all fundamental groups. As another application of these methods, we
formulate a weaker version of the π1 -null disk lemma and show that it is sufficient
for proofs of topological surgery and s-cobordism theorems for good groups.

1. Introduction
The 4-dimensional topological surgery conjecture is known to hold for a class of good
fundamental groups, and its validity for arbitrary groups remains an open problem.
This conjecture, underlying geometric classification theory of topological 4-manifolds,
states that a degree one normal map (M, ∂M) −→ (X, ∂X) from a topological 4manifold to a Poincaré pair, which is a Z[π1 X]-homology equivalence over ∂X , is
normally bordant to a homotopy equivalence if and only if the Wall obstruction
vanishes. It was proved in the simply-connected case by the first author in [4]; the
class of good groups has since been extended to include elementary amenable groups
[5], and more recently the groups of subexponential growth [8, 12]. The surgery
conjecture for arbitrary groups may be reduced to a collection of universal problems
[2, 5] with free fundamental groups.
The main question is whether a given surgery kernel may be “decoupled” from the
fundamental group of the ambient 4-manifold M . If the surgery kernel is represented
by a π1 -null collection of immersed S 2 ∨ S 2 s, where π1 -null means that all double
point loops are contractible in M , then the surgery problem is known to admit a
solution [7, Chapter 6]. We introduce an intermediate notion of 1/2-π1 -null surgery
kernels, where one side is a capped grope (as in the traditional universal models),
and the other side is a π1 -null sphere; more detailes are given below and in section 3.
Our first result is that these problems are universal, in the sense that solving them
is equivalent to establishing 4-dimensional topological surgery for all fundamental
groups.
∗

Supported in part by NSF grant DMS-1612159.
1

2

MICHAEL FREEDMAN AND VYACHESLAV KRUSHKAL ∗

Theorem 1. The collection of 1/2-π1 -null surgery models is universal.
In light of theorem 1, the current status of the surgery conjecture may be summarized
as in figure 1.1. It is a natural question (the answer to which we do not presently
know) whether the 1/2-π1 -null problems could be improved further, for example
using the higher Engel relations discussed in [6, Appendix], to yield a solution to the
surgery conjecture for all groups.

universal

π1 -null

Theorem 1

?

1/2-π1 -null

Figure 1.1. A schematic outline: Theorem 1 reduces the usual universal surgery problems to 1/2-π1 -null kernels. In general the surfaces
pictured as tori may have higher genus, and there are higher multiplicities of double points. It is an open question whether there is a
further reduction to π1 -null problems; a positive answer would imply
the topological 4-dimensional surgery conjecture for all groups.
Next we will elaborate on the construction of the old and new universal surgery
models, and the associated link-slicing problems. (See section 3 for more details.) The
usual universal surgery models are given by S 2 ∨ S 2 -like capped gropes [7, Sections
2.4, 5.1]. Solving these surgery problems is equivalent to the existence of free slices
for links in the collection {Wh(Bing(Hopf))}, the links obtained from the Hopf link
by (a non-trivial amount of) ramified Bing doubling and then ramified Whitehead
doubling. The free-slice condition is the requirement that the fundamental group of
the complement of slices in the 4-ball is free, generated by meridians.
The 1/2-π1 -null models are standard thickenings of the of 2-complexes of the form
(Gc ∨ S) ∪ H c , where Gc is a sphere-like capped grope, S is a sphere with selfintersections, and H c consists of disk-like capped gropes attached to double-point
loops of S , figure 3.3. (Note that S ∪ H c is slightly better than just a π1 -null

ENGEL GROUPS AND UNIVERSAL SURGERY MODELS

3

sphere: contracting H c along any one of its caps gives a null-homotopy for the
double point loops of S .) The links corresponding to these models are of the form
{Wh(Bing(Wh))}, ramified Whitehead double of an (iterated) ramified Bing double
of the Whitehead link.
It is interesting to note that some of the representatives of {Wh(Bing(Wh))} are
Whitehead doubles of (homotopically trivial) + links which are known [8] to be freely
slice. However, for sufficiently high genus surface stages of Gc and H c , and for
sufficiently high multiplicity of double points, these links are of the form Wh(L) where
L is a homotopically essential link with trivial linking numbers. In the previously
considered collection {Wh(Bing(Hopf))} all representatives are of this type.
The proof of theorem 1 relies on a combination of geometric applications of the group
theoretic 2-Engel relation, and handle slides in a handle decomposition of surgery
kernels. The main algebraic input in the proof is the fact that the free group (on any
number of generators) modulo the universal 2-Engel relation [x, [x, y]] is nilpotent of
class 3, see section 2. This contrasts the situation with the Milnor group [14], used
in the study of link homotopy: the free Milnor group on n generators is nilpotent of
class n.
The 2-Engel relation was also used to formulate a collection of universal surgery
models in [6, Section 7] . Our theorem 1 is a sharpening of the result of [6], in
particular the new 1/2-π1 -null surgery models have a very clean description in terms
of their spines and the fundamental group. The proof of theorem 1 is different from
the argument in [6], although both use the 2-Engel relation.
Another application of these techniques concerns the π1 null disk lemma (NDL),
a technical statement underlying the proofs of the 4D topological surgery and scobordism theorems for good groups. This lemma concerns immersed disks bounded
by the attaching curve of a capped grope. In section 5 we formulate a weaker version
of NDL, where instead of the attaching curve one considers curves which are trivial in
the Milnor group of the body of a capped grope. Theorem 2 shows that this apriori
weaker statement is in fact equivalent to NDL.
Section 2 summarizes the background material on the Milnor group and the 2-Engel
relation. In section 3 we give a precise description of the 1/2-π1 -null surgery models.
The proof of theorem 1 is given in 4. Applications to the π1 -null disk lemma are
discussed in section 5.
2. The 2-Engel relation and the Milnor group
This section gives a brief summary of the background material on link homotopy and
group theory needed for the proof of theorem 1. The reader is referred to [14, 6] for
a detailed exposition.

4

MICHAEL FREEDMAN AND VYACHESLAV KRUSHKAL ∗

Let π be a group normally generated by elements g1 , . . . , gk . The Milnor group of
π , defined with respect to the given normal generating set {gi }, is defined by
Mπ = π / hh [gi , giy ] i = 1, . . . , k, y ∈ Gii.

(2.1)

The Milnor group ML of a link L in S 3 is set to be the Milnor group Mπ where
π = π1 (S 3 r L), defined with respect to meridians to the link components.
Two links are link-homotopic (figure 2.1)if they are connected by a 1-parameter family
of link maps where different components stay disjoint for all values of the parameter.
If L, L′ are link-homotopic then their Milnor groups ML, ML′ are isomorphic [14].
Moreover, a k -component link L is link-homotopic to the k -component unlink (htrivial) if and only if ML is isomorphic to the free Milnor group MFm1 ,...,mk . A
k -component link L is h-trivial + if each one of the k links obtained by adding to L
a parallel copy of a single component is homotopically trivial. If a link is not h-trivial,
it is called h-essential.

y
γ

li
mi

Figure 2.1. A non-generic time during a link homotopy. The based
curve γ in the link complement corresponds to the defining relation
[mi , myi ] of the Milnor group.
To fix the notation, the lower central series of a group G is defined inductively by
G1 = G, Gn = [Gn−1 , G]. We will use will the concise notation [g1 , g2 , . . . , gn ] for the
commutator [[. . . [g1 , g2 ], . . . , gn−1 ], gn ] of elements g1 , g2 , . . . , gn ∈ G.
The proof of theorem 1 relies on geometric applications of the 2-Engel relation
(2.2)

[y, x, x] = 1, or equivalently [x, xy ] = 1.

A 2-Engel group π is a group satisfying this relation for all x, y ∈ π . Note that the
defining Milnor relation (2.1) is the same as the 2-Engel relation, but applied only to
x in a fixed set of normal generators. A geometric analogue of the 2-Engel relation
is the notion of weak homotopy, see figure 2.2 and [6, Section 6].
The free Milnor group on n generators MFn is nilpotent of class n [14]. Building on
earlier work of Burnside [1], Hopkins [11] (also see [13]) proved that the nilpotency
class of 2-Engel groups is independent of the number of generators:

ENGEL GROUPS AND UNIVERSAL SURGERY MODELS

5

y
γ
x

Figure 2.2. An elementary weak homotopy. (Compare with figure 2.1.)
Lemma 2.1. Any 2-Engel group is nilpotent of class ≤ 3.
A proof in the setting of the Milnor group is given in [6]. The following corollary will
be used in the proof of theorem 1.
Corollary 2.2. [6, Corollary 2.3] Suppose π is a group normally generated by
g1 , . . . , gn . Let g ∈ π k be an element of the k -th term of the lower central series,
4 ≤ k ≤ n. Then g may be represented in the Milnor group Mπ as a product of
(conjugates of) k -fold commutators C of the form [h1 , . . . , hk ] where two of the elements hi are equal to each other and to a product of two generators, hj = hm = gi1 gi2
for some j 6= m, and each other element hi is one of the generators g1 , . . . , gn .
The commutators [h1 , . . . , hk ] in the statement of the corollary have a geometric
interpretation. Figure 2.3 shows the elementary Engel links where the curves γi read
off these commutators in the complement of the other components, where k = 4.
These links have an important property that a handle slide involving two parallel
components results in a split link consisting of the unknot and an h-trivial link. This
property will be used in the proof of Theorem 1.
(a)

(b)

γ1

γ2
w

w
x

z
y

Figure 2.3. (a): γ1 = [x, yz, yz, w],

z
y

x

(b): γ2 = [yz, x, yz, w].

6

MICHAEL FREEDMAN AND VYACHESLAV KRUSHKAL ∗

Figure 3.1. The figure on the left a surgery kernel given by a height=
1 S 2 ∨ S 2 -like capped grope. The corresponding link on the right is
obtained by Bing doubling both components of the Hopf link, and then
Whitehead doubling each component.
3. Surgery problems
Our set up is a degree one normal map (M, ∂M) −→ (X, ∂X) from a topological
4-manifold to a Poincaré pair, which is a Z[π1 X]-homology equivalence over ∂X ,
with the vanishing Wall obstruction. A solution is a normal cobordism to a simple
homotopy equivalence.
In attempting to represent the surgery kernel by an embedded hyperbolic pair S 2 ∨S 2 ,
one finds in M 2-complexes which “approximate” S 2 ∨ S 2 . Specifically, one may
represent [7, Sections 2.4, 5.1] the surgery kernel by S 2 ∨S 2 -like capped gropes (figure
3.1), and the neighborhoods of these standard examples are themselves sources of
surgery problems. This set constitutes a countable collection of surgery problems,
called universal. If these are solvable then all unobstructed problems are solvable.
0
0

0

0

0
0

Figure 3.2. A Kirby diagram for the surgery kernel in figure 3.1.
There is a collection of link-slicing problems corresponding the universal surgery
problems. Starting with S 2 ∨ S 2 -like capped gropes, one obtains the collecyion
{Wh(Bing(Hopf))}. These links are obtained from the Hopf link by a (non-zero)
amount of iterated ramified Bing doubling, and then a single application of ramified
± Whitehead doubling to each component. See figure 3.1 (right) for an example.

ENGEL GROUPS AND UNIVERSAL SURGERY MODELS

7

These links are obtained by drawing a Kirby diagram of the surgery kernel (see figure 3.2), eliminating the zero-framed Hopf link in the middle (a diffeomorphism on
the boundary), and canceling all 2-handles. Solving a surgery problem produces a
“free” slice complement, i.e. one with free π1 , freely generated by meridians, for
Wh(Bing(Hopf)), i.e. constructs a manifold ≃ ∨S 1 (generators = meridians) with
boundary S0 (Wh(Bing(Hopf))).
The subject of this paper, 1/2-π1 -null surgery kernels, are of the form (Gc ∨ S) ∪ H c
where Gc is a sphere-like capped grope, and S is a sphere with self-intersections,
whose double point loops bound capped gropes H c , figure 3.3.

Hc
Gc

S

Figure 3.3. 1/2-π1 -null surgery kernels of the form (Gc ∨ S) ∪ H c .
This illustration shows capped gropes Gc , H c of height 1 (capped surfaces), and a single double point for the sphere and for the caps. In
general the number of double points and the genera of surfaces (other
than the sphere) are parameters in the collection of surgery models.
The link slicing problems, corresponding to these surgery problems, are of the form
{Wh(Bing(Wh))}, obtained from the Whitehead link (figure 3.5 (a)) by first iterated ramified Bing doubling and then a single application of ramified Whitehead
doubling. These links are constructed from the Kirby diagrams of the surgery kernel
analogously to figure 3.2. An example of such a link (corresponding to both capped
surfaces Gc , H c of genus 1) is the Whitehead double of the link in figure 3.4. This

Figure 3.4. The Bing double of the Whitehead link

8

MICHAEL FREEDMAN AND VYACHESLAV KRUSHKAL ∗

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3.5. (a) The Whitehead link, W h, is h-trivial + . (b) W h with
a parallel copy of one of its components is h-trivial but not h-trivial + .
(c) W h with parallel copies of both components is h-essential.
link is freely slice [9] since it is the Whitehead double of a homotopically trivial +
link. However, links in the family {Wh(Bing(Wh))} corresponding to higher genus
surfaces and higher multiplicity of double points, are of the form Wh(h-essential),
since ramification is used in their construction (figure 3.5 (b,c)). These links are not
known to be slice.
4. Proof theorem 1
The starting point of the proof is one of the usual universal surgery problems X
(discussed in section 3), with a spine A ∨ B where A and B are capped gropes. The
grope height raising procedure [7, Proposition 2.7] may be used to arrange A, B to be
capped gropes of any given height. To be concrete, let A be a 2-stage capped grope,
and B a 4-stage one. Solving this surgery problem amounts to finding a 4-manifold
M which is a homotopy 1-complex and with with the same boundary as X 1.
Consider H , a disk-like symmetric grope of height 2 consisting of the bottom two
stages of B , figure 4.1. To get a complete description of the surgery kernel, one
replaces the curves α, βi in figure 4.1 with Kirby diagrams shown in figure 4.2. These
handle diagrams correspond to the case where all surface stages have genus one, and
each cap has a single self-intersection point. (This case encapsulates the main features
of the unresolved surgery conjecture for free groups.) In full generality, ramified Bing
and Whitehead doubles are used in the construction of the dotted curves in the
figures.
The attaching curve γ of H is in the second term of the derived series π1 (H)(2) , cf.
[8, Lemma 1.1]. Since the n-th term of the derived series of a group is contained in
the 2n -th term of its lower central series, γ ∈ π1 (H)4 .
Denote by U the unlink representing the 1-handles of H . In the genus 1 case in figure
4.1, for a suitable choice of meridians mi to the dotted components U , the curve γ
1A

collection of π1 generators of the 1 -complex is required to match up with the meridians of
the link implicit in the definition of A ∨ B (see section 3).

ENGEL GROUPS AND UNIVERSAL SURGERY MODELS

β2

9

β4

γ
0
α
β1

β3

Figure 4.1. The bottom two stages H of the capped grope B . The
Kirby diagram for H is given by the zero-framed curve γ and the four
dotted curves. (The surface stages of H in this example have genus
1.) βi are the attaching curves of 2-stage capped gropes which form
higher stages of B . α is the attaching curve of the 2-stage capped
grope which (capped off with the standard disk bounded by α in D 4 )
forms A.
0

α, βi

0

0

0

:=

0

Figure 4.2. Explanation of the notation in figure 4.1.


represents the 4-fold commutator [m1 , m2 ], [m3 , m4 ] in the free fundamental group
π1 (S 3 rU). For brevity of notation we continue the proof in this case; it goes through
for arbitrary genera of the surface stages of H since the main algebraic fact, relevant
in the proof, is that the attaching curve γ is in π1 (H)4 .
By lemma 2.2, γ may be expressed in the free Milnor group MFm1 ,...,m4 as a product
Y f
Ek k ,
(4.1)
γ =
k

of conjugates of commutators of the form Ek := [h1 , . . . , h4 ], where two of the elements hi are equal to each other and to a product of two generators, hj = hl = mi1 mi2
for some j 6= l , and each other element hn is one of the generators mi . Next we will

10

MICHAEL FREEDMAN AND VYACHESLAV KRUSHKAL ∗

construct a curve γ ′ in the complement to the 4-component unlink U , representing
in MU = MFm1 ,...,m4 the same group element as γ , and whose geometry reflects the
product structure in equation (4.1). There is a link (figure 2.3) associated to each
commutator Ek . Consider a band sum of these elementary Engel links, one for each
commutator Ek in the expression (4.1), see figure 4.3.
β2
β1

γ′

β3
β4
E1

E2

Figure 4.3. Representation of γ ′ as a band sum of elementary Engel links.
Note that if the curve γ ′ is omitted in figure 4.3, the remaining 4-component link is
the unlink, so putting the dots on them makes sense. Since the band-sum decomposition of U will be important in the rest of the proof, we specify that the attaching
curves βi of the higher stages of the capped grope B, linking the components of U ,
are positioned in the first constituent link (corresponding to E1 ), as shown in figure
4.3.
Straightening the dotted components by an isotopy (and letting γ ′ evolve by an
isotopy in their complement), one gets a link of the type sketched in figure 4.4. In
fact, one could define γ ′ as a simple closed curve reading off the product of the Ek
as in figure 4.4 and carry out the rest of the proof in the group-theoretic setting,
where handle slides are replaced with change of generators in the free group. We
present a version using elementary Engel links, where the argument is geometrically
transparent.


The commutators under consideration, γ = [m1 , m2 ], [m3 , m4 ] and all of the Ei ,
are of maximal length in MF4 := MFm1 ,...,m4 . Indeed, MF4 is nilpotent of class 4,

ENGEL GROUPS AND UNIVERSAL SURGERY MODELS

11

γ′
E1

E2

Figure 4.4. γ ′ reads off the product in equation (4.1) in the free
Milnor group MFm1 ,...,m4 , where mi are meridians to the dotted components.
and all of these elements are in the 4-th term of the lower central series, (MF4 )4 . It
follows that for calculations taking place in the abelian group (MF4 )4 the conjugation
in equation (4.1), as well as the choice of bands in figure 4.3, are immaterial (also see
[6, Remark 4.2]).2
Since γ, γ ′ represent the same element in MF4 , in the free group F4 [γ] · [γ ′ ](−1)
equals a product of conjugates of the Milnor relations (2.1) Wj of the form [mi , myi ]:
Y h
(4.2)
[γ] = [γ ′ ] ·
Wj j .
j

Q h
We incorporate the new factor W := Wj j by adding one more block, reading off
the word W in the free group, at the bottom to γ ′ in figures 4.3, 4.4. (One could also
give a more precise geometric description of individual elements Wj by adding specific
links, similar to the elementary Engel links in figure 2.3. An important difference is
that the links corresponding to Wj are h-trivial, while the the elementary Engel links
are h-essential. This explains why the additional factor W will play a very limited
role in the proof below.) Abusing the notation, we denote the links corresponding to
Ek and W by the same symbols, so U is the band-sum of the links {Ek } and W .
To summarize, after adding the additional factor W to γ ′ (and keeping the same
notation, γ ′ , for the resulting curve), we have achieved [γ] = [γ ′ ] in the free group
F4 . Therefore the curves γ, γ ′ are homotopic in the complement to the 4-component
2In

the general case of higher genus surface stages in H the conjugation is relevant; the curve
γ in figure 4.4 and the bands in figure 4.3 are then drawn accordingly to represent the expression
(4.1).
′

12

MICHAEL FREEDMAN AND VYACHESLAV KRUSHKAL ∗

unlink U . Lemma 4.1 shows that this homotopy may be assumed to be of a special
kind, useful in the conclusion of the proof of the theorem further below.
Lemma 4.1. Suppose two n-component links L0 , L1 are
Then there
`link-homotopic.
n 1
is a level-preserving link-homotopy joining them, H :
S × [0, 1] −→ S 3 × [0, 1],
such that:
1) H is an isotopy of L0 for t ∈ [0, 21 ), and
2) H is an isotopy of L1 for t ∈ ( 12 , 1] which is supported in an arbitrarily small
neighborhood of a 1-complex.
In particular, all singularities (self-intersections of link components) take place at
time t = 1/2.
Proof of lemma 4.1. Start with a level-preserving link homotopy H ′ between L0
and L1 . Each double point is formed by a transverse self-intersection of a link
component. Given a double point of a link component l at time ti , consider an arc α
in S 3 × {t0 + ǫ} with both endpoints on l (and with interior disjoint from the link),
such that contracting α gives the singular link at time ti , see figure 4.5.
l

l
α

α
l

l

Figure 4.5. The two arrows represent a link homotopy followed by an
isotopy. The curve α records the link homotopy data. The right-most
figure in the panel shows the isotopy of L0 used in Lemma 4.1.
At times t > ti + ǫ let α evolve by an isotopy in the complement of the link and
in the complement of other arcs. (The singular set of a link homotopy, consisting
of self-intersections of components, is zero-dimensional, and α is disjoint from it by
general position.) The end result at time 1 is the link L1 with a collection of arcs
{α}, one for each double point of the link homotopy H ′ . Now a link isotopic to
L0 is obtained by taking a component l near one of the endpoints of each curve α
and performing a finger move along α, as shown on the right in figure 4.5. This
describes an isotopy of L0 for t ∈ [0, 21 ). The self-intersections and the isotopy of L1
for t ∈ ( 12 , 1] consist of the reverse of the above finger moves; they are supported in
a neighborhood of the arcs α.

Returning to the proof of the theorem, apply lemma 4.1 to the link-homotopy from
γ ∪ U to γ ′ ∪ U . Here the components of U move by an isotopy, and only the curve
γ undergoes self-intersections. Consider the curve produced in the proof of lemma
4.1 at time 12 − ǫ: it is isotopic to γ , and it differs from γ ′ by finger moves along arcs

ENGEL GROUPS AND UNIVERSAL SURGERY MODELS

13

{α}. Applying an isotopy to them if necessary, these arcs (and the resulting finger
moves) may be assumed to be disjoint from the bands used in band-sums of the links
in figure 4.3. The upshot is that γ is isotopic to a curve respecting the band sum
decomposition, like γ ′ in figure 4.3, except for the finger moves schematically shown
in figure 4.6.
β2
β3

β1

β4
E1

γ

0

0

0

0

E2

Figure 4.6. The band sums in figure 4.3 are replaced with canceling
1-, 2-handle pairs.
Now change the handle structure (but keep the 4-manifold intact) in figure 4.3 by
replacing the band sums with canceling 1-, 2-handle pairs, as shown in figure 4.6.
For the next step in the construction recall that the components of the top elementary
Engel link E1 have linking circles, the attaching curves βi of the higher stages of the
capped grope B. Slide the zero-framed 2-handles, connecting the components of E1
and E2 , off of E1 , using the curves βi . Now the component of E2 have linking
circles, denoted βi2 , which bound parallel copies of the capped gropes attached to
βi . Continue this construction by sliding the zero-framed 2-handles connecting the
links E2 and E3 using βi2 , etc. The result is that the components of each link Ek
have dual circles βik , bounding a 2-stage capped grope. (Note that the bodies of
all these capped gropes are disjoint, but there are cap-cap intersections.) Here the
curves βi1 are defined to be the original βi . This is depicted in figure 4.7. The last
step of this construction yields dual circles βiW , bounding 2-stage capped gropes, for

14

MICHAEL FREEDMAN AND VYACHESLAV KRUSHKAL ∗

β21

β31

β11

β41

γ

β12

β22

β32
β42

Figure 4.7. The zero-framed 2-handles in figure 4.6, resulting from
band sums, are traded for linking circles βji to the components of Ei ,
bounding 2-stage capped gropes.
the components of the bottom link W corresponding to the factor W in equation
(4.2).
Now replace all dotted components in figure 4.7 with zero-framed 2-handles. The
boundary 3-manifold stays the same, but this creates new hyperbolic pairs. To solve
the original surgery problem at the start of the proof of the theorem, it would suffice
to solve the new stabilized surgery problem - thus finding a 4-manifold which is a
homotopy 1-complex, and with the required boundary 3-manifold.
A key feature of the elementary Engel links is that two of the components are parallel,
and removing one of them yields an h-trivial link. For each link Ek perform a handle
slide of one of these components along its parallel. As shown in figure 4.8, the
resulting zero-framed components which participated in the handle slide share a dual
capped grope (attached to the curve labeled β2k in the figure). In addition, the slid
component has its own geometric dual, labeled β3k . The δij -linking pairing with the
dual capped gropes is restored by performing the handle slide of β2k over β3k . The
result is a split link: an h-trivial link E k , obtained from an elementary Engel link
Ek by omitting a component, and a trivial unlinked component.

ENGEL GROUPS AND UNIVERSAL SURGERY MODELS

β1k

15

β4k

γ

0
0

0

β2k
0
β3k

Figure 4.8. The result of a handle slide.
The handle-slide step is performed on each link Ej , but not on the link W . To
summarize, the entire zero-framed link now consists of

(4.3)
L := γ ∪ ∪k E k ∪ (unlinked trivial components) ∪ W,
and each component of L has a dual circle which is the attaching region of a 2-stage
capped grope. (For γ this capped grope is given by the side A of the original surgery
kernel, for all other components they are parallel copies of the top two stages of B .)
The main point of the band-sum and handle-slide construction above is that the
link L is h-trivial. Each link E k is h-trivial by construction, and W is h-trivial by
definition, since it corresponds to a product of Milnor’s relations.
Consider the disjoint null-homotopies ∆ for L in D 4 . These null-homotopies, capped
off with the cores of the zero-framed 2-handles attached to D 4 along L, form the
π1 -null spheres in the 1/2-π1 -null models (figure 3.3). Each of these spheres has a
dual capped grope which constitutes the other side of the surgery models.
The double point loops of ∆ are null-homotopic in the 4-ball; these null-homotopies
intersect ∆ and each other. All these intersections are eliminated using the dual
capped gropes; now the double point loops of the spheres bound capped gropes as
required in the definition of 1/2-π1 -null models. All of the gropes can be made
disjoint by removing the cap-cap intersections using the usual operations of grope
height raising and contraction/push-off [7, Sections 2.3, 2.7].

5. The π1 -Null Disk Lemma
In this section we show that the methods developed in the proof of theorem 1 also
give a new formulation of the π1 -null disk lemma. This lemma underlies the proofs
of the surgery and s-cobordism conjecture for good groups; indeed, the class of good

16

MICHAEL FREEDMAN AND VYACHESLAV KRUSHKAL ∗

groups is defined precisely as the groups for which this lemma holds (see below).
Recall its statement [8]:
π1 -null disk lemma (NDL). Let Gc be a Capped Grope of height 2 with the
attaching curve γ , and φ : π1 Gc −→ π a group homomorphism. Then γ bounds a
disk ∆ : D 2 −→ Gc which is π1 -null under φ.
A group π is called good if it satisfies NDL for all choices of capped gropes Gc and
homomorphisms φ. In this statement, following the notation of [8], capital letters
in the term Capped Grope indicate the standard 4-dimensional thickening of the
underlying 2-complex. Before stating the new version of NDL, consider the following
rephrasing of its statement. Let H denote the body of a capped grope Gc of height
2. Then H is a handlebody ♮ki=1 (S 1 × D 3 ), and there is a collection of framed curves
in ∂H which serve as attaching regions of kinky handles (thickenings of caps of Gc ).
Connected to a basepoint in H , these curves represent generators of the free group
Fk ∼
= π1 (H). Then a basic calculation in Milnor’s theory of link homotopy shows that
the attaching curve γ of Gc is non-trivial in the free Milnor group Mπ1 (H). In other
words, representing H by the Kirby diagram U consisting of k dotted components
corresponding to the chosen generators of π1 (H), γ ∪ U is an h-essential link. The
example with all surface stages of Gc of genus 1 is shown in figure 4.1, where in the
present context the curves βi serve as the attaching curves of caps of Gc .
Our new formulation shows that it suffices to consider curves in the boundary of the
handlebody H which are trivial in Mπ1 (H). Consider the following statement:
Weak π1 -Null disk Lemma (WNDL). Let M = H ∪ (plumbed 2−handles),
where H is a handlebody ♮ki=1 (S 1 × D 3 ), and the 2-handles are attached along a
collection of standard framed curves in ∂H which represent a set of generators of the
free group π1 (H). Let γ be a curve in ∂H , trivial in Mπ1 (H), where the Milnor
group is defined with respect to the given generators. Let φ : π1 M −→ π be a group
homomorphism. Then γ bounds a disk ∆ : D 2 −→ M which is π1 -null under φ.
In analogy with the π1 -null disk lemma, we say that a group π satisfies WNDL if
the statement holds for all M, γ and φ. Arbitrary plumbings and self-plumbings are
allowed among the 2-handles attached to H in the statement of WNDL, in analogy
with caps of a capped grope. A representative example of γ ⊂ ∂(♮3i=1 (S 1 × D 3 ))
is shown in figure 5.1. This example is obtained by deleting a component of an
elementary Engel link, figure 2.3.
If γ were null-homotopic in the complement of the dotted unlink U , of course it
would bound a π1 -null disk in M since H is π1 -null in M . However in non-trivial
cases, such as the one in figure 5.1, self-intersections of the components of U are
required to make γ null-homotopic. Such self-intersections do not make sense since
U represents standard slices removed from D 4 .

ENGEL GROUPS AND UNIVERSAL SURGERY MODELS

β1

17

β3

γ

β2

Figure 5.1. An example of γ ⊂ ∂H in the statement of WNDL.
Theorem 2. If a group π satisfies WNDL, then π is good.
Proof. Consider (Gc , γ) and φ : π1 Gc −→ π in the statement of NDL. The proof of
theorem 1 through the point (shown in figure 4.6) just before stabilization applies to
the curve γ within the handlebody H . Here the circles βi linking the components,
shown in figure 4.1 and used throughout the proof of theorem 1, are understood to
be the attaching curves of kinky handles. Instead of stabilizing (replacing dotted
components with zero-framed 2-handles), perform the handle slides on 1-handles
rather than on 2-handles. One gets links of the form shown in figure 4.8, but the
components are dotted rather than 0-framed. As in the proof of theorem 1, the link
L in equation (4.3) is h-trivial. Since π is assumed to satisfy WNDL, γ bounds a
π1 -null disk under φ.

The main open case is π = Fk , and φ = the identity homomorphism. In other words,
the question is whether γ as in the statement of WNDL bounds a π1 -null disk in
M . For example, one may consider k = 3 and the curve γ in figure 4.8, for various
choices of plumbed and self-plumbed 2-handles attached to the curves βi .
References
[1] W. Burnside, On groups in which every two conjugate operations are permutable, Proc. Lond.
Math. Soc. 35 (1902), 28-37.
[2] A. Casson and M. Freedman, Atomic surgery problems, Four-manifold theory (Durham, N.H.,
1982), 181-199, Contemp. Math., 35, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1984.
[3] T.D. Cochran, Derivatives of links: Milnor’s concordance invariants and Massey’s products.
Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 84 (1990), no. 427.
[4] M. Freedman, The topology of four-dimensional manifolds, J. Differential Geom. 17(1982), 357453.
[5] M. Freedman, The disk theorem for four-dimensional manifolds, Proc. ICM Warsaw (1983),
647-663.
[6] M. Freedman and V. Krushkal, Engel relations in 4-manifold topology, Forum Math. Sigma 4
(2016), e22, 57 pp.
[7] M. Freedman and F. Quinn, The topology of 4-manifolds, Princeton Math. Series 39, Princeton,
NJ, 1990.

18

MICHAEL FREEDMAN AND VYACHESLAV KRUSHKAL ∗

[8] M. Freedman and P. Teichner, 4 -Manifold Topology I: Subexponential groups, Invent. Math.
122 (1995), 509-529.
[9] M. Freedman and P. Teichner, 4 -Manifold Topology II:, Invent. Math. 122 (1995)
[10] H. Heineken, Engelsche Elemente der Lánge drei, Illinois J. Math. 5 (1961), 681-707.
[11] C. Hopkins, Finite groups in which conjuate operations are commutative, Am. J. Math. 51,
(1929), 35-41.
[12] V. Krushkal and F. Quinn, Subexponential groups in 4 -manifold topology, Geom. Topol. 4
(2000), 407-430.
[13] F.W. Levi, Groups in which the commutator operation satisfies certain algebraic conditions, J.
Indian Math. Soc. 6 (1942), 87-97.
[14] J. Milnor, Link Groups, Ann. Math 59 (1954), 177-195.
[15] C.T.C. Wall, Surgery on compact manifolds. London Mathematical Society Monographs, No.
1. Academic Press, London-New York, 1970.
Microsoft Station Q, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-6105, and
Department of Mathematics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106
E-mail address: michaelf@microsoft.com
Department of Mathematics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904
E-mail address: krushkal@virginia.edu

