arXiv:1708.07175v3 [math.CO] 22 May 2018

A PROOF OF ATANASSOV’S CONJECTURE AND OTHER
GENERALIZATIONS OF SPERNER’S LEMMA.
YITZCHAK SHMALO
Abstract. A simple proof of Atanassov’s Conjecture is presented. Atanassov’s
Conjecture is a generalization of Sperner’s Lemma, a lemma which has been used
to prove Brouwer’s Fixed Point Theorem, among other fixed point theorems. The
proof of Atanassov’s Conjecture is based on the Brouwer Degree of maps and is
extremely elementary. It is much simpler than the original proofs given for the
conjecture and provides some insight into the nature of the conjecture. Furthermore,
a generalization of the conjecture is presented and finally a new theorem, similar to
the original Sperner Lemma, is proved.

1. Introduction
In the beginning of the twentieth century, Luitzen Brouwer proved the Brouwer Fixed
Point Theorem, which states that every continuous function f from an n-dimensional
ball to itself has a fixed point, meaning that for some x we have f pxq “ x. Historically,
Sperner’s Lemma has been used to provide a straightforward proof for Brouwer’s Fixed
Point Theorem. Some have also used Sperner’s Lemma to prove Kakutani Fixed Point
Theorem, a generalization of Brouwer’s Fixed Point Theorem. Such proofs are generally
simpler than those previously offered for the existence of fixed points and are also
somewhat constructive, meaning that they can be used to approximate the position
of fixed points. Sperner’s Lemma itself is also simple to prove and much is known
about generalizations of the lemma, for example Atanassov’s Conjecture. In this paper,
proofs for Atanassov’s Conjecture and other propositions similar to Sperner’s Lemma
are given.

Ť
1.1. Sperner’s Lemma for simplices. Consider an n-simplex T , and T “ iPI Ti ,
with I finite, a simplicial decomposition of T . A labeling of T is a map φ : T Ñ
t1, 2, . . . , n ` 1u. In particular, each vertex v of T and of any of the Ti ’s is assigned a
unique label φpvq P t1, 2, . . . , n ` 1u.
A simplex T is said to be completely labeled if its vertices are assigned all labels from
t1, 2, . . . , n ` 1u.
The labeling φ is called a Sperner labeling if every point p that lies on some face S
of T is assigned one of the labels of the vertices of S. There are no restrictions on the
labeling of the interior points of T .
In the most basic form the Sperner Lemma states the following:
1

2

YITZCHAK SHMALO

Theorem 1.1 (Sperner Lemma [Spe28]). Given Ť
an n-simplex T with a complete
Sperner labeling, a simplicial decomposition T “ i Ti . Then the number of completely labeled simplices Ti is odd. In particular, there exists at least one simplex Ti
that is completely labeled.
Atanassov’s Conjecture is a generalization of the lemma which states the following.
A simplex Pi is completely labeled if it has vertices carrying d`1 different labels. Let
P be a convex, d-dimensional polytope, with n vertices, which Ť
is divided into convex,
d-dimensional simplices tPi uiPI , with I finite, such that P “ iPI Pi , and for i ‰ j,
intpPi q X intpPj q Ť
“ H and Pi X Pj is either empty or a face of both Pi and Pj . Assume
that φ : V pP q Y iPI V pPi q Ñ t1, 2, . . . , nu is a labeling of the vertices of P and of Pi
such that:
‚ Each label from t1, 2, . . . , nu is assigned to some vertex of P , so no two vertices
are assigned the same label;
‚ If a vertex of Pi lies on some face W of P , then that vertex is assigned one of
the labels of the vertices of W .
Then there are at least n ´ d simplices of tPi uiPI ; each completely labeled. This
theorem was first proved in [LPS02].
2. Preliminaries
2.1. Sperner’s Lemma for polytopes. First we describe a more general Sperner
Lemma-type of result for polytopes, following [BN98]. Parts of this section were taken
almost directly from [GS17]. Let P be a convex n-dimensional polytope. We consider
a labeling φ : P Ñ t1, 2, . . . , n ` 1u of P .
A polytope is said to be completely labeled if its vertices are assigned all labels from
t1, 2, . . . , n ` 1u.
A labeling φ : P Ñ t1, . . . , n ` 1u is said to be a non-degenerate labeling if no pn ´ 1qdimensional face of P contains points which take pn`1q or more different values. Thus,
every n-dimensional face of P can only contains points which take pn`1q or less different
labels.
We introduce some tools.
Consider the standard n-dimensional simplex T “ convp0, e1 , e2 , . . . , en q Ă Rn ,
where we denote by pe1 , e2 , . . . , en q the standard basis of Rn , and by convp¨q the convex
hull of a set. We denote the corresponding vertices of T as ta1 , . . . , an`1 u.
Given an n-dimensional, oriented, convex polytope P , a labeling φ : P Ñ t1, . . . , n `
1u, and the standard n-simplex T of vertices a1 , . . . , an`1 , a realization of φ is a continuous map f : P Ñ T , satisfying the following conditions:
(i) If v is a vertex of P then f pvq “ aφpvq , i.e., f pvq is the vertex ai of T with the
index i equal to the label of v;
(ii) If S is face of P with vertices v1 , . . . , vk , then f pSq Ă convpaφpv1 q , . . . , aφpvk q q.
Informally, a realization of P is a continuous mapping of P onto T that ‘wraps’ BP
around BT , such that the labels of the vertices of P match with the indices i of the
vertices of T . Such f is in general non-injective. For a smooth, boundary preserving
map f : pM, BM q Ñ pN, BN q between two oriented n-dimensional manifolds with

SIMPLE PROOF OF ANASSOV’S CONJECTURE

3

boundary, it is known that degpf q “ degpBf q, where Bf : BM Ñ BN is the map induced
by f on the boundaries. The degree of the map f can be defined as the signed number
of preimages f ´1 ppq “ tq1 , . . . , qk u of a regular value p of the map f , where each point
qi is counted with a sign ˘1 depending on whether dfqiř: Tqi M Ñ Tp N is orientation
preserving or orientation reversing. That is, degpf q “ qPf ´1 ppq signpdetpdfq qq, where
p P N zBN is a regular value of f . The definition of the Brouwer degree extends via
homotopy to continuous maps.
Proposition 2.1 ([BN98]). Let P be a convex n-dimensional polytope.
(i) Any labeling φ of some P admits a realization f ;
(ii) Any two realizations of the same labeling are homotopic as maps of pairs
pP, BP q ÞÑ pT, BT q;
(iv) If degpf q ‰ 0 then P is completely labeled, where degpf q is the Brouwer Degree
of the realization of φ, a labeling of P .
The following is a generalization of the Sperner Lemma from [BN98].
Ť
Theorem 2.2 ([BN98]). Assume that P is an n-dimensional polytope, P “ iPI Pi is
a decomposition of P into polytopes as above, and φ : P Ñ t1, . . . , n ` 1u is a nondegenerate labeling. If degpBf q ‰ 0, then there exists a polytope Pi that is completely
labeled.
Proof. Let f : P Ñ T be a realization of the labeling φ; the existence of f is ensured by
Proposition 2.1. We transform the polytope
P into another polytope P ˚ , homotopically
Ť
Ť
transform the decomposition P “ iPI Pi into another decomposition P ˚ “ iPI Pi˚ ,
and homotopically transform the map f : P Ñ T into a map f ˚ : P ˚ Ñ T as follows:
‚ We construct a new polytope P ˚ by appending to the vertices of P all the
vertices of the the Pi ’s lying on the faces of P , and appending to the faces of P
all the faces of the Pi ’s lying Ť
on the faces of P ; the resulting polytope P ˚ still
˚
has the decomposition P “ iPI Pi ;
Ť
‚ We apply a homotopy deformation to the decomposition
iPI Pi and to the
Ť
realization f to obtain a new decomposition P ˚ “ iPI Pi˚ , with the labeling
of Pi˚ inherited from that of Pi , and a new realization f ˚ : P ˚ Ñ T so that, for
˚
˚
˚
every i, the restriction of f|P
˚ to Pi maps BPi to BT and is also a realization.
i
˚ q “ degpBf ˚
The later property ensures that degpf|P
q.
˚
|BP ˚
i

i

From the condition that if a vertex of Pi˚ lies on some face S of P ˚ , then that vertex
is assigned one of the labels of the vertices of S, we have degpf ˚ q “ degpf q. Using the
addition and homotopy properties of the Brouwer degree, we obtain that
ÿ
ÿ
degpBf q “ degpf q “ degpf ˚ q “
degpfi˚ q “
degpBfi˚ q
i

i

If degpf q ‰ 0, then i degpBfi˚ q ‰ 0, which means that there exists a polytope
˚
˚ q ‰ 0. By Proposition 2.1, and since
such that degpBf|BP
˚ q ‰ 0, hence degpf
|Pi˚
i
the labeling of Pi is the same as the labeling of Pi˚ , we have that Pi is completely
labeled.


Pi˚

ř

4

YITZCHAK SHMALO

Now we give the notion of a cover of a polytope, following [LPS02].
A cover C of
Ť
a convex polytope P is a collection of simplices in P such that SPC S “ P . We say
that a labeled set of simplices cover a polytope P , or is a cover of P , under a map f ,
if the following conditions hold:
(i) If v is a vertex of S in the collection then f pvq “ aφpvq , i.e., f pvq is the vertex
ai of P with the index i equal to the label of v;
(ii) If R is face of S with vertices v1 , . . . , vk , then f pRq Ă convpaφpv1 q , . . . , aφpvk q q.
(ii) f is surjective.
Theorem 2.3 ([LPS02] and [RS85]). Let CpP q denote the covering number of an
pn, pq-polytope P ; which is the size of the smallest cover of P . Then, CpP q ě pn ´ dq.
This result is best possible as the equality is attained for stacked polytopes.
3. Proof of Atanassov’s Conjecture
Theorem 3.1. Let P be a convex, d-dimensional polytope, with n vertices, which
is divided into convex, d-dimensional simplices tPi uiPI , with I finite, such that P “
Ť
iPI Pi , and for i ‰ j, intpPi q X intpPj q “
ŤH and Pi X Pj is either empty or a face of
both Pi and Pj . Assume that φ : V pP q Y iPI V pPi q Ñ t1, 2, . . . , nu is a labeling of the
vertices of P and of Pi such that:
‚ Each label from t1, 2, . . . , nu is assigned to some vertex of P , so no two vertices
are assigned the same label;
‚ If a vertex of Pi lies on some face W of P , then that vertex is assigned one of
the labels of the vertices of W .
A simplex Pi is completely labeled if it has vertices carrying d ` 1 different labels.
Atanassov’s Conjecture states that there are at least n ´ d simplices Pi ; each completely
labeled.
Proof. Denote by ai the vertex of P labeled with i. Form a realization of φ as a
continuous map f : P Ñ P , satisfying the following conditions:
‚ If v is a vertex of P then f pvq “ aφpvq , i.e., f pvq is the vertex of P of index
equal to the label of v;
‚ If R is face of P with vertices w1 , . . . , wk then f pRq Ă convpaφpw1 q , . . . , aφpwk q q,
where convp¨q denotes the convex hull of a set.
‚ For any i, the restriction of f |i to Pi , with Pi having vertices l1 , . . . , lk , is such
that f pPi q Ă convpaφpl1 q , . . . , aφplk q q and is also a realization.
Given that a vertex of Pi which lies on some face W of P is assigned one of the labels
of the vertices of W , we have that this labeling is non-degenerate. From the conditions
of the realization and the first condition of the labeling, we have that degpBf q “
degpf q “ 1. Thus, f is surjective, which means that a set of Pi simplices cover P under
f . Notice, however, that every Pi which is not completely labeled is mapped to a n ´ 1
or smaller dimension of P , under the realization, and cannot be used to cover P . So
only completely labeled Pi polytopes can be used to cover P . But the smallest number
of simplices needed to cover a d-dimensional polytope with n vertices is n ´ d. Thus
we must have at least n ´ d complete simplices Pi . P must be split into at least n ´ d

SIMPLE PROOF OF ANASSOV’S CONJECTURE

5

different simplices and each one must be mapped to by at least one Pi and each such
Pi is completely labeled.

Remark 3.2. After writing this paper I found a similar proof in [Mus14], one which
also uses the notion of a degree. Nevertheless, the use of the equality degpBf q “ degpf q
greatly simplifies the proof.
The following is a generalizations of Atanassov’s conjecture.
Ť
Theorem 3.3. Let P be a convex, d-dimensional polytope, with n vertices,ŤP “ iPI Pi
is a decomposition of P into simplices as above. Assume that φ : V pP q Y iPI V pPi q Ñ
t1, 2, . . . , nu is a non-degenerate labeling of the vertices of P and of Pi . A simplex Pi
is completely labeled if it has vertices carrying d ` 1 different labels. Take P 1 to be a
d-dimensional polytope, with n vertices. We require that each label from t1, 2, . . . , nu
is assigned to some vertex of P 1 , so no two vertices are assigned the same label. Take
f to be a realization of φ, where f : P Ñ P 1 . Then we have at least ppn ´ dqqpdegpBf qq
different completely labeled simplices Pi . Furthermore, if degpBf q “ 0 then we will have
an even number of completely labeled simplices.
Proof. Follows almost immediately from the previous proof.



4. Neighboring Labeling Lemma
In this section a new labeling lemma is presented, one very similar to the original
Sperner Lemma. The concept of the Brouwer Degree is again used.
Theorem 4.1. Let P be a convex, d-dimensional polytope, with n vertices, which
is divided into convex, d-dimensional polytopes tPi uiPI , with I finite, such that P “
Ť
iPI Pi , and for i ‰ j, intpPi q X intpPj q “
ŤH and Pi X Pj is either empty or a face of
both Pi and Pj . Assume that φ : V pP q Y iPI V pPi q Ñ t1, 2, . . . , nu is a labeling of the
vertices of P and of Pi such that:
‚ Each label from t1, 2, . . . , nu is assigned to some vertex of P , so no two vertices are assigned the same label. We call two labels d-similar if there is a d
dimensional face of P which they share. Also, a label is n-similar to itself for
all n.
‚ Every vertex v of every Pi is assigned one of the labels of the vertices of P in
the carpvq.
‚ If a vertex of Pi shares a k-face with another vertex (either of Pi or of Pj ) then
both of their labels must be k-similar, for all k.
A polytope Pi is completely labeled if it has vertices carrying labels t1, 2, . . . , nu. This
lemma states that there is at least one completely labeled Pi .
Proof. We form a realization f : P Ñ P of φ. Any Pi is either mapped only to BP or
covers P entirely. This observation follows from the condition that if a vertex of Pi is
connected to another vertex (either of Pi or of Pj ) then both of their labels must be
similar. Once again we have that degpBf q “ degpf q “ 1. But if degpf q “ 1 we must
have at least one complete Pi , for any individual Pi either covers P entirely, in which

6

YITZCHAK SHMALO

case it is completely labeled, or only covers the boundary of P . But if all of the Pi ’s
only cover the boundary of P then degpf q ­“ 1

Acknowledgement
The author is grateful to Marian Gidea, who read and commented on the first draft
of this work. As mentioned, parts of the second section were taken from a paper which
we both authored.
References
[BN98] Boris M. Bekker and N. Yu. Netsvetaev. Generalized Sperner lemma and subdivisions into
simplices of equal volume. Journal of Mathematical Sciences, 91(6):3492–3498, 1998.
[GS17] M. Gidea and Y. Shmalo. Combinatorial approach to detection of fixed points, periodic orbits,
and symbolic dynamics. eprint arXiv:1706.08960, 2017.
[LPS02] Jesus A. De Loera, Elisha Peterson, and Francis Edward Su. A Polytopal Generalization of
Sperner’s Lemma. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series A, 100(1):1 – 26, 2002.
[Mus14] Oleg R Musin. Around sperner’s lemma. eprint arXiv:1405.7513, 2014.
[RS85] G.L. Rothschild and E.G. Straus. On triangulations of the convex hull of n points. Combinatorica, 5:167–179, 1985.
[Spe28] E. Sperner. Neuer Beweis für die Invarianz der Dimensionszahl und des Gebietes. Abh. Math.
Sem. Univ. Hamburg, 6:265–272, 1928.

